BLESSING HOMES AT THE EPIPHANY 

The Priest put a little water in a small basin and begins the service as follows:
  
Priest: Blessed is our God always, now and ever, and to the ages of ages.

People: Amen.
Priest: In peace let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy. (Repeated alter each petition)
For the peace from above and for the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord. 
For our Archbishop (N) and our Bishop (N), the honorable presbytery, the deaconate in Christ, and all the clergy and the laity, let us pray to the Lord.
That this house and all those who live in it may be sanctified and blessed, let us pray to the Lord.
For you are a merciful God who love mankind, and to you we ascribe glory, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
Priest: Peace be with all.
People: And with your spirit.
Priest: Let us bow our heads to the Lord.
People: To you, O Lord.
Priest: Incline your ear, O Lord, and hear us, you who accepted to be baptized in the Jordan and sanctified the waters; and bless all of us who, through the bowing of our heads, express our obedience to you; grant that we may be filled with your sanctification through the drinking and sprinkling of this water, and may it bring us, O Lord, health of soul and body.
For you are the sanctification of our souls and bodies and to you we ascribe glory and thanksgiving and worship, together with your
Beginning-less Father and your all-holy and good and life-giving Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.

At this point the priest plunges a small Cross into the basin three times, pouring blessed water from the Epiphany service over it, and chanting:
 
Priest: During your baptism in the Jordan, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was made manifest. For the Begetter’s voice bore witness to you, by calling you his beloved Son. And the Spirit in the form of a dove, reaffirmed the truthfulness of the word. O Christ our God, who were revealed from above and illumined the world: Glory to you.

Then the priest offers the Cross to the family for kissing and sprinkles their heads with blessed water. The he sprinkles each room of the house while chanting the above hymn and the following one. 

From above you appeared today, to the earth’s people, and your light, dear Lord, has been marked upon us, who in true knowledge sing to you: You came, you appeared, O Light unapproachable.

If this is a new home, which has not been blessed before, the priest reads the following prayer:

Priest: O God, our Savior, who was pleased to enter under the roof
of Zacchaeus, thereby bringing salvation to him and to all his household: Protect from every injury those who have chosen to live in this house and who address their prayers and petitions to you through us your unworthy servants; keep them safe from all harm; bless this their dwelling, and preserve their lives unassailable.
For to you belong all glory, honor and worship, together with your beginningless Father and your all-holy and good and life-giving Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages.
Family: Amen.
Priest: Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy, we pray to you, hear us and have mercy.
Family: Lord, have mercy. (3) (Repeated after each petition)
Priest: Again we pray for all pious and Orthodox Christians.
Again we pray for our Archbishop (N) and our Bishop (N), and all our brothers and sisters in Christ.
Again we pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, visitation and forgiveness of the sins of the servants of God (N) who live in this house, and that they may be forgiven every transgression, both voluntary and involuntary.
For you are a merciful God who love mankind, and to you we ascribe glory, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages.
Family: Amen.
Priest: (The Dismissal)
Glory to you, O Christ, our God and our hope, glory to you.
May Christ, our time God, who accepted to be baptized by John in the Jordan for our salvation, through the intercessions of his most pure and holy Mother; by the power of the precious and life-giving Cross; through the protection of the venerable bodiless powers in heaven; through the prayers of the venerable and glorious Prophet and Forerunner John the Baptist; of the holy, glorious and all-praised Apostles; of the holy, glorious and victorious martyrs; of our righteous and God-bearing Fathers; of the holy and divine ancestors of the Lord God Joachim and Anna, and of all the saints, have mercy on us and save us, for he is a good and merciful God who loves mankind.
Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us.
Family: Amen.
