FUNERAL SERVICE OF NON-ORTHODOX BY ORTHODOX PRIEST
In accordance with the Encyclical of the Holy Synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, dated October 20, 1869, and the Encyclical of the Holy Synod of the Church of Greece, No. 1621/343, dated March 15, 1891, it is permitted for Orthodox Priests to bury non-Orthodox Christians if no clergyman of their own denomination is available.
The Funeral is conducted as follows: The Priest, vested in rason and epitrahilion, says:
PRIEST: Blessed is our God always now and for ever, and unto the ages of ages. 
CHOIR: Amen.
Then the Choir or the Reader chants the three sections of from Psalm 118. No petitions or exclamations are made.
First Stasis.
Blessed are the blameless in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord. Alleluia.
My soul has longed to desire your judgements at all times. Alleluia.
My soul slumbered from weariness; strengthen my by your words. Alleluia.
Incline my heart to your testimonies, and not to covetousness. Alleluia.
Dejection took hold of me because of sinners who abandon your law. Alleluia.
I am a companion of all who fear you, and who keep your commandments. Alleluia.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. Alleluia.
Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen. Alleluia.
Second Stasis.
Your hands made me and fashioned me; make me understand, and I shall learn your commandments. Have mercy on your servant.
For I have become like a wineskin in the frost; I have not forgotten your statutes. Have mercy on your servant.
I am yours; save me, for I have sought your statutes. Have mercy on your servant.
I did not turn aside from your judgements, for you gave me your law. Have mercy on your servant.
I inclined my heart to do your statutes for ever, because of the recompense. Have mercy on your servant.
It is time for the Lord to act; they have cast your law to the winds. Have mercy on your servant.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. Have mercy on your servant.
Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen. Have mercy on your servant.
Third Stasis.
And have mercy on me. Alleluia.
Look upon me and have mercy on me, in accordance with the judgement of those who love your name. Alleluia.
I am young and despised; I have not forgotten your statutes. Alleluia.
Hear my voice, O Lord, in accordance with your mercy; in accordance with your judgement give me life. Alleluia.
Rulers have persecuted me for no reason; and my heart has been in awe of your words. Alleluia.
My soul will live and praise you; and your judgements will help me. Alleluia.
I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek out your servant, because I have not forgotten your commandments.

Then follows the Epistle and the Gospel Readings.
Prokeimenon, Tone 3.
To you I shall cry, O Lord my God, do not be silent towards me; never be silent towards me or I shall become like those who go down to the pit.
Deacon: Wisdom!
Reader: The Reading is from the First Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians. [4:13-18]
Deacon: Let us attend.
Reader: Brethren, I do not wish you to be ignorant about those who have fallen asleep, so that you may not grieve like the rest who have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, so too God will bring with him those who sleep through Jesus. We tell you this by the Lord’s word, that we who are left alive at the Lord’s coming will by no means precede those sleep. Because the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a shout, at the voice of an Archangel and with the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first. Then we who are left alive will be snatched up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and so we shall all be with the Lord.
Priest: Peace to you.
Reader: And to your Spirit. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Tone 6.
Verse: Blessed is the one whom you have chosen and taken, O Lord.
Deacon: Wisdom, stand upright! Let us listen to the Holy Gospel.
Priest: Peace to all.
People: And to your spirit.
Priest: The Reading is from the Holy Gospel according to John. [5:24-30]
People
Glory to you, O Lord, glory to you!
Priest: Let us attend.
The Lord said to the Jews who had come to him, ‘Amen, Amen I say to you, that one who hears my word and believes in him who sent me has eternal life; and is not coming to judgement, but has passed over from death to life. Amen, Amen I say to you that the hour is coming and is now, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God; and those who have heard will live. For just as the Father has life in himself, so he has given to Son to have life in himself. And he has given him authority to deliver judgement also, because he is son of man. Do not marvel at this; because the hour is coming in which all who are in the tombs will hear his voice; and they will come out, those who have done good to the resurrection of life, but those who have done ill to the resurrection of judgement. I can do nothing of myself; as I hear, I judge, and my judgement is just; because I do not seek my will, but the will of the Father who sent me.’
People: Glory to you, O Lord, glory to you!

Then the Dismissal
PRIEST: Glory to you, O Christ our God and our hope, glory to you.
May Christ our true God, through the intercessions of his most holy Mother, of the holy, glorious and all-praised Apostles, of the holy, glorious victorious Martyrs of our righteous and God bearing Father, of the holy and righteous ancestors of our Lord God; Joachim and Anna, and of all the saints, grant rest to the soul of his departed servant (N), and have mercy on us and save us, for he is a good God who loves mankind.
Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us.
CHOIR: Amen.

AT THE GRAVESIDE
While exiting the Church and from the Hearse to the grave we chant slow: “Holy God, Holy Mighty…”. 
The committal is done with the earth alone and the priest says:
Priest: The earth is the Lord’s and the fullness thereof, you are dust and to dust you return.

