DIVINE LITURGY OF OUR FATHER AMONG THE SAINTS BASIL THE GREAT
THE LITURGY OF THE CATECHUMENS
Take note, that the Divine Liturgy of St. Basil is celebrated only ten times in the year: on the five Sundays of Great Lent [but not on Palm Sunday], on Holy and Great Thursday, On Holy and Great Saturday, on the Eve of the Nativity of Christ [Christmas Eve], on the Eve of Theophany and on St. Basil’s day [1st January].
If the Divine Liturgy of St. Basil is celebrated with Vespers, the Priest shall say, “Blessed is the kingdom of the Father...” and the Reader shall read the introductory Psalm 103 [104]. Vespers shall be sung as usual according to the typikon up to the readings from the Old Testament. After the readings, the Priest [or Deacon] shall say, “Let us pray unto the Lord.” And then the Priest shall say, “For Thou our God art Holy and to Thee we ascribe glory...” and here beginneth The Divine Liturgy of St. Basil with the readings of the Apostle and Gospel and the rest of the Liturgy as usual. 

Priest: Blessed is the Kingdom of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
LITANY OF PEACE
Deacon: In peace, let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy. And so after each petition.
Deacon: For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.
For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of the holy Churches of God, and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.
For this holy house, and for those who enter it with faith, reverence and the fear of God, let us pray to the Lord. 
For our Archbishop N, for the honoured order of presbyters, for the diaconate in Christ, for all the clergy and the people, let us pray to the Lord.
For our Country, the President, and all in civil authority, let us pray to the Lord.
For this city, for every city, town and village, and for the faithful who dwell in them, let us pray to the Lord.
For favourable weather, an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and temperate seasons, let us pray to the Lord.
For those who travel by land, air or water, for the sick, the suffering, for those in captivity, and for their safety and salvation, let us pray to the Lord.
For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint, let us pray to the Lord.
Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.
Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
People: To you, O Lord.
PRAYER OF THE FIRST ANTIPHON
Priest: Lord, our God, whose might is beyond compare and whose glory is beyond understanding, whose mercy is without measure and whose love for mankind is beyond all telling, look upon us and upon this holy house, Master, according to your loving kindness, and bestow on us and on those who pray with us your acts of rich mercy and compassion.
(aloud) For to you belong all glory, honour and worship, Father, Son Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
FIRST ANTIPHON
If it is a feast of the Lord, or of the Mother of God, or its afterfeast or leavetaking, the Antiphons of the feast are sung; otherwise the Typika are used.
On Sundays the following Antiphon is usually sung:
Mode 2. Psalm 102 
1st Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name. (102:1)
People: At the prayers of the Mother of God, O Saviour, save us.
2nd Verse: Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget none of his benefits. (102:2)
People: At the prayers of the Mother of God, O Saviour, save us.
3rd Verse: The Lord has prepared his throne in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all. (102:19)
People: At the prayers of the Mother of God, O Saviour, save us.
4th Verse: Bless the Lord, all his works, in every place of his dominion; bless the Lord, O my soul! (102:22)
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
People: At the prayers of the Mother of God, O Saviour, save us.
While this is being sung the Deacon bows, leaves his place and goes and stands in front of the icon of the Mother of God, looking towards the icon of Christ, holding his orarion in the three fingers of his right hand.
After the completion of the Antiphon he comes and stands in his usual place, bows and says the
SHORT LITANY
Deacon: Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy.
Deacon: Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.
People: Lord, have mercy. 
Deacon: Commemorating our allholy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother of God and EverVirgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
People: To you, O Lord.
PRAYER OF THE SECOND ANTIPHON
Priest: Lord, our God, save your people and bless your inheritance; protect the fullness of your Church, sanctify those who love the beauty of your house, glorify them in return by your divine power, and do not forsake us who hope in you.
(aloud): For yours is the might, and yours the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
SECOND ANTIPHON
The second Psalm of the Typika or, on Sundays, the following Antiphon Mode 2. Psalm 145
1st Verse: Praise the Lord, O my soul: while I live I will praise the Lord; while I have any being, I will praise my God. (145:1-2)
People: Son of God, risen from the dead, save us who sing to you: Alleluia!
On weekdays, outside Eastertide or a feast of the Lord, we sing each time:
Son of God, wonderful in the Saints, save us who sing to you: Alleluia!
2nd Verse: Blessed are those whose helper is the God of Jacob; whose hope is in the Lord their God. (145:5)
People: Son of God, risen from the dead, save us who sing to you: Alleluia!
3rd Verse: Who made heaven and earth, the sea and all that is in them. (145:6)
People: Son of God, risen from the dead, save us who sing to you: Alleluia!
4th Verse: The Lord will be king for ever: your God, O Sion, will reign throughout all generations. (145:10)
People: Son of God, risen from the dead, save us who sing to you: Alleluia!
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
Then, on all days:
Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Onlybegotten Son and Word of God, * who, being immortal, * accepted for our salvation * to take flesh from the holy Mother of God * and EverVirgin Mary, and without change became man; * you were crucified, Christ God, * by death trampling on death, * being one of the Holy Trinity, * glorified with the Father and the Holy Spirit: * save us!
The Deacon again goes and stands in front of the icon of the Mother of God, and after the completion of the Antiphon he comes and stands in his usual place, bows and says the
SHORT LITANY
Deacon: Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy.
Deacon: Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.
People: Lord, have mercy. 
Deacon: Commemorating our allholy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother of God and EverVirgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
People: To you, O Lord.
PRAYER OF THE THIRD ANTIPHON
Priest: You have given us grace to make these common and united prayers, and have promised that when two or three agree in your name you will grant their requests; fulfil now the petitions of your servants as is expedient, granting us in this present age the knowledge of your truth and in the age to come eternal life.
(aloud) For you, O God, are good and love mankind, and to you we give glory, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
The Deacon enters the Sanctuary by the south door.
THIRD ANTIPHON
AND
ENTRANCE WITH THE HOLY GOSPEL
Then the Beatitudes, or the Third Antiphon, are sung. On Sundays the following Antiphon in the Mode of the week. Psalm 117
1st Verse: Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. (117:1)
 Then the Resurrection Apolytikion of the current Mode.
2nd Verse: Let all those who fear the Lord say, that he is good, that his mercy endures for ever. (117:4)
Then the Resurrection Apolytikion.
3rd Verse: This is the day which the Lord has made; let us rejoice and be glad in it. (117:24)
The Resurrection Apolytikion.
While the Doxastikon of the Beatitudes, or the Third Antiphon, is being sung, the Priest and Deacon, standing in front of the Holy Table, make three bows; then the Priest takes the holy Gospel and gives it to the Deacon, who kisses the Priest’s hand. And so they come out through the north door, preceded by lights, and make the Little Entrance. Standing in the middle of the church they bow their heads. 
The Deacon, in a low voice, says: Let us pray to the Lord.
PRAYER OF THE ENTRANCE
Priest: Master, Lord our God, you have set orders and armies of Angels and Archangels in heaven to minister to your glory; grant that, with our entrance, holy Angels may enter, concelebrating with us, and with us glorifying your goodness.
For to you belong all glory, honour and worship, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
When the prayer is finished, the Deacon, in a low voice, says to the Priest:
Deacon: Master, bless the holy Entrance.
And the Priest, blessing the entrance, says, in a low voice: 
Priest:	Blessed is the entrance of your holy place, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen. 
The Priest kisses the Gospel. The *Deacon, standing in the middle of the church in front of the Priest and raising the sacred Gospel, says aloud:
Deacon: Wisdom. Stand upright.
Then the Deacon, followed by the Priest, enters the Sanctuary through the Holy Doors and places the Gospel on the Holy Table.
The People sing the Entrance Chant as follows:
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ. Son of God, risen from the dead, save us who sing to you: Alleluia!
If it is not a Sunday, Eastertide, or a feast of the Lord, we sing each time:
Son of God, wonderful in the Saints, save us who sing to you: Alleluia!
During Eastertide: Bless God in the Churches; the Lord from the fountains of Israel. Son of God, risen from the dead, save us who sing to you: Alleluia!
The Apolytikia for the day and for the dedication of the Church are sung and after
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Mode 2. Kontakion of the Mother of God.
Protection of Christians that cannot be put to shame, unfailing mediation with the Maker, do not despise the voices of us sinners as we pray; but, in your love, be quick to help us who cry to you with faith: Hasten to intercede, make speed to entreat, O Mother of God, for you ever protect those who honour you.
After the Kontakion, the *Deacon says: Let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy.
PRAYER OF THE TRISAGION
Priest: Holy God, at rest in the holy place, hymned by the Seraphim with the thriceholy song, glorified by the Cherubim and worshipped by every heavenly Power, out of non-existence you brought the universe into being and created male and female according to your image and likeness, adorning them with every gift of your grace. You give wisdom and understanding to those who ask, and you do not reject the sinner, but for our salvation you have established repentance. You have counted us, your humble and unworthy servants, worthy to stand at this time before the glory of your holy altar, and to offer you due worship and praise. Accept, Master, the thriceholy hymn even from the mouth of us sinners, and visit us in your goodness. Pardon us every offence, voluntary and involuntary; sanctify our souls and bodies, and grant that we may worship you in holiness all the days of our life; at the prayers of the holy Mother of God and of all the Saints who have been wellpleasing to you in every age.

(aloud): For you, our God, are holy, and to you we give glory, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever,
*Deacon, coming near the Holy Doors and facing the People:
Deacon: And to the ages of ages. 
People: Amen.
Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us.
Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us.
Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Holy Immortal, have mercy on us.
*Deacon: Dynamis.
People: Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us.
The Priest and the Deacon also say the Trisagion, making three bows before the holy Table.
Then the Deacon says to the Priest: Master, command. And they go to the Throne. As they go the Priest says:
Priest: Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.
Deacon: Master, bless the Throne on high.
Priest: Blessed are you on the throne of glory of your Kingdom, who are seated upon the Cherubim, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
THE READINGS FROM THE NEW TESTAMENT
*Deacon: Let us attend.
Priest: Peace to all.
People: And to your spirit.
*Deacon: Wisdom.
Reader, coming into the middle of the church, says: Prokeimenon of the Apostle. Mode… Psalm of David.
*Deacon: Let us attend.
The Reader reads the Prokeimenon with its verse.
*Deacon: Wisdom.
The Reader reads the title of the Apostle.
*Deacon: Let us attend.
The Reader reads the Apostle. 
Priest: Peace to you.
Singers: Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia (with the verses).
While the Alleluia is being sung the *Deacon, taking the censer with incense, approaches the Priest, and having received a blessing for the incense he censes the book of the Gospel, the Holy Table all round, the whole sanctuary, the Priest and, coming out a little from the Holy Doors, the principal icons and the People.
PRAYER OF THE GOSPEL
Priest: Master, Lover of mankind, make the pure light of your divine knowledge shine in our hearts and open the eyes of our mind to understand the message of your Gospel. Implant in us the fear of your blessed commandments, so that, having trampled down all carnal desires, we may pursue a spiritual way of life, thinking and doing all things that are pleasing to you. For you are the illumination of our souls and bodies, Christ God, and to you we give glory, together with your Father who is without beginning, and your allholy, good and lifegiving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
The Deacon bows his head and saysto the priest in a low voice:
Deacon: Master, bless the herald of the Good Tidings of the Holy Apostle and Evangelist N.
The Priest blesses him, saying:
Priest: May God, through the prayers of the holy, glorious Apostle and Evangelist N, grant you to proclaim the word with much power, for the fulfilling of the Gospel of his Beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ.
And the Priest hands him the Gospe. The Deacon, saying Amen, takes it. Having kissed the Priest’s hand, he goes out through the Holy Doors, and preceded by lights makes his way to the Ambo.
THE HOLY GOSPEL
Priest: Wisdom. Stand upright. Let us listen to the Holy Gospel. Peace to all.
People: And to your spirit.
*Deacon: The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to N
People: Glory to you, O Lord, glory to you.
Priest: Let us attend.
The *Deacon chants the Gospel for the day. When it is finished the Priest blesses the Deacon  saying:
Priest: Peace to you.
People: Glory to you, O Lord, glory to you.
The Priest takes the Gospel from the Deacon, kisses it and blesses the people with it. He then replaces it on the Holy Table.
THE HOMILY
Then the Preacher instructs the people in the word of God.
Then the Deacon, standing in his usual place, says the following
LITANY OF FERVENT SUPPLICATION
*Deacon: Let us all say, with all our soul and with all our mind, let us say.
People: Lord, have mercy.
*Deacon: Lord almighty, the God of our fathers, we pray you, hear and have mercy.
People: Lord, have mercy.
*Deacon: Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy, we pray you, hear and have mercy.
People: Lord, have mercy. Three times. And so after the remaining petitions.
*Deacon: Also we pray for our Archbishop N. and all our brotherhood in Christ.
Also we pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, visitation, pardon and forgiveness of sins for the servants of God, all devout and Orthodox Christians, those who dwell in or visit this city and parish, the wardens and members of this church and their families; [and for the servants of God N and N (Here he may name those for whom he has been asked to pray), and all who have asked for our prayers, unworthy though we are.]
Also we pray for the blessed and everremembered founders of this holy church, and for all our brothers and sisters who have gone to their rest before us, and who lie asleep here in the true faith; and for the Orthodox everywhere[, and for the servants of God N and N (Here he may name those for whom he has been asked to pray), and that they may be pardoned all their offences, both voluntary and involuntary.
Also we pray for those who bring offerings, those who care for the beauty of this holy and venerable house, for those who labour in its service, for those who sing, and for the people here present, who await your great and rich mercy.
PRAYER OF SUPPLICATION
Priest: Lord, our God, accept this fervent supplication from your servants, and have mercy on us according to the multitude of your mercy; and send down your pity on us and on all your people, who await your rich mercy.
(Aloud) For you, O God, are merciful, and love mankind, and to you we give glory, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
Then the Litany for the Catechumens, those preparing for Baptism. 
To each petition the People answer: Lord, have mercy.
*Deacon: Catechumens, pray to the Lord.
Believers, let us pray for the catechumens;
That the Lord will have mercy on them;
Instruct them in the word of truth;
Reveal to them the Gospel of righteousness;
Unite them to his Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church.
Save them, have mercy on them, help them and keep them, O God, by your grace.
Catechumens, bow your heads to the Lord.
People: To you, O Lord.
PRAYER FOR THE CATECHUMENS
(BEFORE THE UNFOLDING OF THE ANTIMENSION)
Priest: Lord, our God, dwelling on high and beholding things below, who for the salvation of mankind sent forth your onlybegotten Son, our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, look upon your servants the catechumens, who have bowed their necks to you; and count them worthy in due time of the washing of rebirth, the forgiveness of sins and the garment of incorruption; unite them to your holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, and number them with your chosen flock.
(Aloud) That they also with us may glorify your allhonoured and majestic name, of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
Then the Priest unfolds the Antimension on the Holy Table.
 *Deacon: As many as are catechumens, depart; catechumens, depart; as many as are catechumens, depart. None of the catechumens!
THE LITURGY OF THE FAITHFUL
*Deacon: As many as are believers, again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord have mercy.
*Deacon: Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.
People: Lord have mercy.
*Deacon: Wisdom.
FIRST PRAYER OF THE FAITHFUL
(AFTER THE UNFOLDING OF THE ANTIMENSION)
Priest: You, O Lord, hast made known unto us this great mystery of salvation: You hast counted us, Your humble and unmeritable servants, worthy to be ministers of Your sacred altar. Do You, through the power of the Holy Spirit, make us able for this ministry, that standing without condemnation before Your holy glory we may offer unto You the sacrifice of praise; for You it is which works all in all. Grant, O Lord, that this our sacrifice may be acceptable unto You, both for our sins and for the errors of the people, and well-pleasing to You.
(aloud) For to you belong all glory, honour and worship, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
*Deacon: Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord have mercy.
*Deacon: Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.
People: Lord have mercy.
*Deacon: Wisdom. And he enters the Sanctuary.
SECOND PRAYER OF THE FAITHFUL
Priest: O God who with loving-kindness and tender mercies hast visited our lowly estate; who hast set us, Your humble, sinful and unworthy servants, before Your holy glory to minister at Your sacred altar: do You through the power of the Holy Spirit strengthen us for this ministry, and give us utterance that our mouths may be opened to invoke the grace of Your Holy Spirit upon the gifts that we would lay before You. 

(Aloud) That being always guarded by your might, we may give glory to you, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
CHERUBIC HYMN AND
GREAT ENTRANCE
WITH THE GIFTS OF BREAD AND WINE
The Singers begin the Cherubic Hymn to a slow and solemn melody, in the dominant Tone of the day:
Choir: We, who in a mystery represent the Cherubim and sing the thriceholy hymn to the lifegiving Trinity, let us now lay aside every care of this life.
While it is being sung, the Priest, in front of the Holy Table, reads, in a low voice, the
PRAYER OF THE CHERUBIC HYMN
None of those who are entangled in carnal desires and pleasures is worthy to approach or draw near or minister to you, King of glory; for to serve you is great and awesome even for the heavenly powers. Yet on account of your inexpressible and boundless love for mankind you became man without change or alteration and were named our High Priest; and as Master of all you have committed to us the sacred ministry of this liturgical and unbloody sacrifice.
For you alone, Lord our God, are Ruler over all things in heaven and on earth, mounted on the throne of the Cherubim, Lord of the Seraphim and King of Israel, the only Holy One, resting in the holy place. Therefore I entreat you, who alone are good and ready to hear: Look upon me, your sinful and unprofitable servant, and purify my soul and heart from an evil conscience. By the power of your Holy Spirit enable me, clothed with the grace of the priesthood, to stand at this your Holy Table and celebrate the mystery of your holy and most pure Body and your precious Blood.
For to you I come, bending my neck and praying: Do not turn away your face from me, nor reject me from among your children, but count me, your sinful and unworthy servant, worthy to offer these gifts to you. For you are the one who offers and is offered, who receives and is distributed, Christ our God, and to you we give glory, together with your Father, who is without beginning, and your allholy, good and lifegiving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
After the prayer the Priest and the Deacon say the Cherubic Hymn three times, as follows:
Priest: We, who in a mystery represent the Cherubim and sing the thriceholy hymn to the lifegiving Trinity, let us now lay aside every care of this life.
*Deacon: For we are about to receive the King of all, invisibly escorted by the angelic hosts. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
Then the Priest, or Deacon, takes the censer and censes the Holy Table, the Sanctuary, the principal icons and the People, coming out a little from the holy Doors.
 In a low voice he says, if it is Sunday, Having seen the Resurrection of Christ , and Psalm 50, excluding the last two verses which begin, Do good, Lord, to Sion. If it is not a Sunday he says, Come let us worship three times and then Psalm 50 as above. Then he enters the Sanctuary and puts away the censer. He comes with the Deacon in front of the Holy Table and they make three bows, and they say quietly troparia of compunction. 
O Saviour, I have sinned before You as the Prodigal Son, accept me, O Father, as a penitent, and have mercy upon me, O God.
With the voice of the Publican I cry unto You, O Christ Saviour. Be gracious unto me, as You was with him, and have mercy upon me, O God.
They kiss the Antimension and the Holy Table, bow again and then turn to the people and bow to them, saying: 
May God forgive them that hate us and them that love us.

They go to the table of the Prothesis, and having made three bows they kiss the covered Holy Gifts, saying: God cleanse me a sinner.
Then the Deacon says to the Priest: Master, lift up,
The Priest lifts the Aer and places it on the shoulders of the Deacon, saying:
Priest: Lift up your hands to the holy place and bless the Lord.
Then he takes the covered Paten and places it with every care and reverence on the Deacon’s head, saying:
Priest: God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet.
 while he himself takes the Holy Chalice, likewise covered.
When the Singers reach the end of the first part of the Cherubic Hymn, the Deacon and the Priest come out from the north door of the Sanctuary, preceded by exapteryga, lights and incense, and pass through the north aisle and the middle of the Nave as they make the Great Entrance. As they process they proclaim, one after the other:
May the Lord God  remember you all in his Kingdom  always, now and for ever,  and to the ages of ages.
Singers: Amen. And they complete the Cherubic Hymn:
For we are about to receive the King of all invisibly escorted by the angelic hosts. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
The Priest and Deacon enter the Sanctuary.
The Deacon, stands to the right in front of the Holy Table and says to the Priest as he enters:
May the Lord God remember your priesthood in his Kingdom, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
And the Priest, as he enters, says to him:
May the Lord God remember your diaconate in his Kingdom, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
Then the Priest places the Chalice on the Holy Table, takes the Paten from the Deacon and places it to the left of the Chalice, saying:
The noble Joseph, taking your most pure Body from the Tree, wrapped it in pure linen with sweet spices and laid it for burial in a new grave.
Then he takes the covers from the sacred Paten and the Holy Chalice and lays them to one side on the Holy Table. He takes the Aer from the shoulders of the Deacon, holds it over the censer and lays it over the Chalice and Paten. Then he takes the censer and censes the Gifts three times, as the Deacon says: Do good, Master.
Priest: Do good to Sion, Lord, in your good pleasure, and let the walls of Jerusalem be rebuilt. Then you will be well pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, oblation and whole burnt offerings. Then they will offer calves upon your altar. (Psalm 50:20-21)
He puts away the censer and says to the Deacon:
Remember me, brother and fellow celebrant.
Deacon: May the Lord God remember your priesthood in his Kingdom, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
Then the Deacon bows his head, holding his orarion in the three fingers of his right hand, and says to the Priest:
Pray for me, brother and fellow celebrant.
And the Deacon: The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you.
Priest: The Spirit himself will concelebrate with us all the days of our life. 
Deacon: Remember me, holy Master.
Priest: May the Lord God remember you in his Kingdom, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
And the Deacon, having answered Amen, kisses the Priest’s right hand and goes out and stands in his usual place and says the
LITANY OF THE PRECIOUS GIFTS
*Deacon: Let us complete our prayer to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy. And so after each of the following petitions.
*Deacon: For the precious gifts here set forth, let us pray to the Lord.
For this holy house and those who enter it with faith, reverence and the fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.
For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint, let us pray to the Lord.
Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
That the whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let us ask of the Lord.
People: Grant this, O Lord. And so after each of the following petitions.
*Deacon: An angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies, let us ask of the Lord.
Pardon and forgiveness of our sins and offences, let us ask of the Lord.
Those things that are good and profitable for our souls, and peace for the world, let us ask of the Lord.
That we may live out the rest of our days in peace and repentance, let us ask of the Lord.
A Christian end to our life, painless, unashamed and peaceful, and a good defence before the dread judgement seat of Christ, let us ask.
Commemorating our allholy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother of God and EverVirgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
People: To you, O Lord.
PRAYER OF OFFERING
Priest: O Lord our God who hast created us and brought us into this life; who hast shown unto us the way of salvation; who hast granted unto us the revelation of heavenly mysteries: You are that hast appointed us unto this ministry, by the power of Your Holy Spirit. Therefore, O Lord, be well-pleased that we may be servants of Your New Testament, and ministers of Your holy sacraments. According to the greatness of Your mercy do You accept us who now draw nigh unto Your sacred altar, that we may be worthy to offer You this reasonable and bloodless sacrifice for our sins and for the errors of the people: which do You accept for a sweet-smelling savour upon Your holy, and most heavenly, and spiritual altar, and send down upon us the grace of Your Holy Spirit. Look upon us, O God, and behold this our worship, which do You accept even as You didst accept the gifts of Abel, the sacrifices of Noah, the whole burnt offering of Abraham, the sacred priestly offices of Moses and Aaron, the peace offerings of Samuel. Even as You didst receive from the holy Apostles this true worship, so also, O Lord, do You of Your goodness accept these gifts at the hands of us sinners: that counted worthy to serve blamelessly before Your Holy Altar we may obtain the reward of faithful and wise stewards in the fearful day of Your just recompense.
(aloud): Through the compassion of your onlybegotten Son, with whom you are blessed, together with your allholy, good and lifegiving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
Priest: Peace to all.
People: And to your spirit.
*Deacon: Let us love one another, that with one mind we may confess:
People: Father, Son and Holy Spirit, Trinity consubstantial and undivided.
The Priest bows three times and kisses the Aer over the Gifts, saying in a low voice: I will love you, Lord, my strength. The Lord is my firm foundation, my refuge and my deliverer. Likewise the Deacon, standing in his place, bows and kisses the Cross on his orarion. At a concelebrated Liturgy the Priests here exchange the Kiss of Peace, the senior saying: Christ is in our midst, to which the junior answers: He is and will be. If there is more than one Deacon they also exchange the Kiss with one another in the same way.
THE CREED
*Deacon: The doors, the doors. With wisdom let us attend.
People:
I believe in one God, * Father, Almighty,* Maker of heaven and earth,* and of all things visible and invisible.
      And in one Lord, Jesus Christ,* the onlybegotten Son of God, * begotten from the Father * before all ages, * Light from Light, * true God from true God, * begotten not made, * consubstantial with the Father,* through him all things were made. * For our sake and for our salvation * he came down from heaven, * and was incarnate from the Holy Spirit * and the Virgin Mary * and became man. * He was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate,* and suffered and was buried; * he rose again on the third day, * in accordance with the Scriptures, * and ascended into heaven * and is seated at the right hand of the Father. * He is coming again in glory * to judge the living and the dead, * and his kingdom will have no end.
      And in the Holy Spirit, * the Lord, * the Giver of life, * who proceeds from the Father, * who together with Father and Son is worshipped * and together glorified; * who spoke through the Prophets. * In one Holy, * Catholic and Apostolic Church. * I confess one Baptism * for the forgiveness of sins. * I await the resurrection of the dead * and the life of the age to come. Amen.
While the Creed is being said the Priest lifts the Aer and waves it above the Chalice and Paten. At the words and ascended into heaven…, he kisses the Cross in the middle of it, folds it and puts it to one side with the veils.
THE HOLY OBLATION
*Deacon: Let us stand with awe; let us stand with fear; let us be attentive to the holy oblation, that in peace we may offer,
People: Mercy and peace: a sacrifice of praise.
The Deacon reenters the Sanctuary.
Priest, blessing the People: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father, and the communion of the Holy Spirit be with you all.
People: And with your spirit.
Priest, raising his hands: Let our hearts be on high.
People: We have them with the Lord.
Priest: Let us give thanks to the Lord.
People: It is right and fitting.
Priest: O You who are, O Master and Lord, God the Father, Almighty and proper to be worshipped: it is truly meet, and right and befitting the magnificence of Your holiness that we should praise You, hymn You, bless You, worship You, give thanks unto You and glorify You, for verily You are the one true God, and to offer, with a contrite heart and a humble spirit, this our reasonable worship: for You it is that hast granted unto us the knowledge of Your truth. And who can utter Your mighty acts? Who shall cause all Your praises to be heard, or tell of Your wondrous works at all times? O Master of all. Lord of heaven and earth, and all creation, visible and invisible, You that sits upon the throne of glory, and dost behold the depths, who are without beginning, invisible, incomprehensible, indescribable, immutable, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, our great God and Saviour, who is our hope, who is the image of Your goodness, the equal imprint of Your likeness, showing in Himself You the Father, the living Word, true God, the pre-eternal Wisdom, life, sanctification, power, the true light through whom was manifest the Holy Spirit: the Spirit of truth, the gift of adoption, the earnest of our inheritance to come, the first-fruits of eternal good things, the life-giving power, the fountain of sanctification, that enables every creature having reason, and understanding to serve You and  ascribe to You everlasting glory, for all are Your servants: angels, archangels, thrones, dominions, principalities, authorities, powers and the many-eyed cherubim praise You. Round about You stand the seraphim, six wings hath the one and six wings hath the other: with twain they cover their faces and with twain they cover their feet, and with twain they do fly, crying one unto another, with incessant voices,    unstilled  hymns of glory, (aloud) singing, crying, shouting the triumphal hymn, and saying:
People: Holy, holy, holy, Lord Sabaoth; heaven and earth are full of your glory. Hosanna in the highest. Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest.
The *Deacon takes the Star from the Paten, making the sign of the Cross with it over the Paten, kisses it and lays it aside on the Holy Table.
Priest: And with these blessed Powers, O Master and lover of mankind, we also cry aloud and say: Holy indeed and most Holy are You, and no bounds are there to the majesty of Your holiness; and just are You in all Your works, for in righteousness and true judgement hast You ordered all things for us. For after You have formed man of the dust of the earth, and honoured him, O God, with Your own image, You didst set him in the paradise of delight and didst promise unto him immortal life and the enjoyment of eternal good things in the keeping of Your commandments. But when he disobeyed You, his true God, which created him, and was allured by the deceit  of the serpent, and slain by his own trespasses, You, O Lord, in righteous judgement didst cast him out of paradise into this world, and didst return him to the earth from whence he was taken: dispensing for him salvation by regeneration, which is in Your Christ Himself. For You, O Good One, didst not wholly forsake Your creature which You have made, neither didst You forget the works of Your hands, but because of Your tender mercy in divers manners didst visit him. Prophets didst You send, mighty works hast You performed through Your saints which have been well-pleasing unto You in every generation: You hast spoken unto us by the mouth of Your servants the prophets, foretelling unto us the salvation to come. The law You gave  to help us, angels You didst appoint to guard us. And when the fullness of the time was come You didst speak unto us by Your Son Himself, by whom also You made the worlds. Who, being the brightness of Your glory, and the express image of Your person, and upholding all things by the word of His power, thought it not robbery to be equal with You, God and Father. But being God pre-eternal did He yet showed Himself upon earth, and conversed with men: and being incarnate of the holy Virgin He emptied Himself and took upon Him the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of the body of our humility that He might fashion us like the image of His glory. For inasmuch as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, so it seemed good unto Your only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of You, O God and Father, made of a woman, the holy Mother of God and ever-Virgin Mary, made under the law, to condemn sin in His flesh, that they who die in Adam may be quickened in Your Christ Himself. Who dwelling in this world gave saving commandments and having turned us from the deceits of idols, hath brought us unto the knowledge of You, the true God and Father, having possessed us unto Himself for a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation. Who hath cleansed us with water and sanctified us by the Holy Spirit, giving Himself a ransom unto death, wherein we were held, sold under sin: and by the Cross having descended into Hades, that He might fill all things with Himself, He loosed the pains of death: and being risen again the third day He made a way for all flesh unto the resurrection of the dead, for since it was not possible that the author of life should be held by corruption, He became the first-fruits of them that had fallen asleep, the firstborn from the dead: that in all things He might have the pre-eminence. And ascending into heaven He sat down on the right hand of Your Majesty on high, from whence He shall come again to render to every man according to His deeds. Who also hath left unto us for a remembrance of His saving passion these things which we here set forth according to His commandments. For when He was  about to go forth to His voluntary and ever-memorable and life-giving death, in the night that He gave Himself for the life of the world, took bread in His sacred and most pure hands and when He had shown it unto You, O God and Father, and having given thanks, He blessed it, hallowed it and brake it:
(aloud) Take, eat; this is my body, which is broken for you, for the forgiveness of sins.
People: Amen.
Priest: Likewise after supper he also took the cup, saying:
(aloud) Drink from this, all of you; this is my blood of the New Covenant, which is shed for you and for many for the forgiveness of sins.
People: Amen.
Priest: Do this in remembrance of me: for as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, you do show my death and confess my resurrection. Remembering therefore this our Saviour’s command and all that has been done for us: the Cross, the Tomb, the Resurrection on the third day, the Ascension into heaven, the Sitting at the right hand, the Second and glorious Coming again,
The *Deacon crosses his hands and elevates the Chalice and Paten as the Priest says aloud: 
Priest: offering you your own from your own — in all things and for all things —
People: we praise you, we bless you, we give thanks to you, O Lord, and we pray to you, our God.
Priest, bowing his head with great compunction, says:
Wherefore, most holy Lord, we also Your sinful and unworthy servants whom You hast suffered to minister at Your hallowed altar, not through our own righteousness, for we have done no good thing on earth, but through Your mercy and compassions which You hast shed on us abundantly, we presume to draw nigh unto Your Holy Altar and presenting unto You the figures of Your Christ, we pray You and beseech You, O Holy of Holies, of the good pleasure of Your goodness let Your Holy Spirit come upon us and upon these gifts here set forth, and bless, hallow and manifest:

Then the Deacon, pointing to the holy Bread with his orarion, says in a low voice:
Deacon: Master, bless the holy Bread.
The Priest stands upright and blesses the holy Bread, saying in a low voice:
Priest: And make this bread the precious Body of your Christ,
Deacon, in a low voice: Amen.
Then the Deacon, pointing to the Chalice with his orarion, says in a low voice:
Deacon: Master, bless the holy Cup.
The Priest blesses the Chalice, saying:
Priest: And what is in this Cup the precious Blood of your Christ,
Deacon, in a low voice: Amen.
Then the Deacon, pointing to them both, says in a low voice:
Deacon: Master, bless them both.
Priest, blessing both the Chalice and Paten, says:
Priest: Changing them by your Holy Spirit,
Deacon, in a low voice: Amen, Amen, Amen.
The Priest, bowing profoundly, continues:
And unite us all one with another, as many as are partakers of the one bread and cup in the communion of the one Holy Spirit. And suffer none to partake of the holy Body and Blood of Your Christ unto judgement or condemnation; but grant that we may obtain mercy and grace, together with all the saints which have been well-pleasing unto You since the world began; with our Forefathers and Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Preachers, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Teachers: And with every righteous spirit in faith made perfect.
As he censes from in front of the holy Table, the Priest says, aloud:
Above all for our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, the Mother of God and Ever-Virgin, Mary.
Singers: It is truly right to call you blessed, who gave birth to God, everblessed and most pure, and Mother of our God. Greater in honour than the Cherubim and beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption you gave birth to God the Word; truly the Mother of God, we magnify you.
If it is a feast of the Lord or of the Mother of God, or its leavetaking, the Irmos of the 9th Ode of the Canon is sung instead.
The Priest gives the censer to the Deacon, who censes around the Holy Table and, in a low voice, remembers to himself those whom he wishes of the living and the dead, while the Priest continues:
With St. John the Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist, for the holy and all-glorious Apostles, St. [Name] to whose memory we dedicate this day, and all Your saints, at whose intercessions visit us, O God.
And remember all them that are fallen asleep in the hope of resurrection unto life eternal: [and he remembers such as he will of the departed, pronouncing their names] and give them rest where the light of Your countenance watches over them.
Also we pray You remember, O Lord, Your Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church that stretches unto the ends of the earth, and extend Your peace unto her which You have purchased with the precious Blood of Your Christ; and establish this temple even unto the end of the world.
Remember, O Lord, them that have set before You these gifts, and them for whom and by whom and on behalf of whom they are offered.
Remember, O Lord, them that strive and bring forth the fruit of good works in Your holy Churches; and them that care for the poor. Reward them with Your rich and heavenly bounty, bestowing on them heavenly things instead of earthly, eternal things instead of temporal, incorruptible things instead of corruptible.
Remember, O Lord, them that wander in deserts, in mountains, in caves and in pits of the earth. 
Remember, O Lord, them that continue in their virginity, in piety, in temperance, and in a blameless way of life.
Remember, O Lord, all that are in authority. Grant them peace, profound and lasting peace. Commune in their hearts good things for Your Church and for all Your people. That in their peace we may lead a quiet and peaceful life in all godliness and decency. Preserve them that are good in Your goodness; and of Your kindness make them that are evil good.
Remember, O Lord, the people here present, and those who for a just cause are absent, and have mercy upon them and us according to multitude of Your mercy. Fill their storehouses with every good thing. Preserve their marriage bonds in peace and harmony. Nourish the infants, instruct the young, support the aged; comfort the fainthearted; gather together them that are scattered; bring back them that went astray and unite them to Your Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. Set free them that are vexed with unclean spirits. Sail with them that sail, journey with them that journey by land or air. Protect the widows; defend the orphans; deliver the captives; heal the sick.
Them that stand trial, that are in prison, that live in exile, that are in bitter bondage, and all that are in tribulation, necessity and danger do You remember, O God, and all them that are in need of Your great and tender mercy; them that love us and them that hate us, and them that have entreated us, unworthy though we be, to pray for them; and all Your people, do You remember, O Lord our God, and upon them all pour out Your rich mercy, granting unto all their petitions that are unto salvation.
And them that we have not remembered, through ignorance or forgetfulness, or by reason of the multitude of names, do You Yourself call to mind, O God, who knows the age and name of each, and knows every man from his mother’s womb. For You are, O Lord, the help of the helpless, the hope of the hopeless, the Saviour of them that are storm-tossed, the haven for them at sea, the physician of them that are sick. Be You Yourself all things to all men, O You that knows every man and his petitions, his house and his needs.
Preserve this city [village, monastery], every city and land, from pestilence, famine, earthquakes, flood, fire and the sword, from invasion of enemies and civil war.
 (aloud): First of all, remember, Lord, our Archbishop, N., and grant that he may serve your holy churches in peace, safety, honour, health, and length of days, rightly discerning the word of your truth.
The *Deacon, standing at the Holy Door, recites the Diptychs of the living and then exclaims: And those whom each one has in mind, and each and all.
People: And each and all.
Priest: Remember, O Lord, all the Orthodox episcopate who rightly discern the word of Your truth.
Remember, O Lord, according to the multitude of Your compassions my unworthiness: forgive me all my trespasses, voluntary and involuntary, and withhold not because of my sins the grace of Your Holy Spirit from the gifts here set forth.
Remember, O Lord, the priesthood, the diaconate which is in Christ, and all clerical orders; and put none of us to shame who compass Your Holy Altar. Visit us, O Lord, in Your loving kindness, manifest Yourself to us in Your bountiful compassion. Vouchsafe unto us temperate winds and fair seasons. Send gentle rains that the land may yield her increase. Crown the year with Your goodness. Cause divisions to cease in the Churches. Quench the raging of the heathen. By the power of Your Holy Spirit speedily destroy the uprisings of heresy. Receive us all into Your kingdom, having rendered us children of light and children of the day. Your peace and Your love grant unto us, O Lord our God, for You hast rendered to us all things

(aloud): And grant that with one voice and one heart we may glorify and praise your allhonoured and majestic name, of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
The Priest blesses the People with his hand, saying:
And the mercies of our great God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, shall be with all of you.
People: And with your spirit.
THE PREPARATION FOR HOLY COMMUNION
LITANY OF THE LORD'S PRAYER
The Deacon comes out and stands in his usual place.
*Deacon: Having commemorated all the saints, again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy. 
*Deacon: For the precious gifts here set forth and sanctified, let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy.
That our God, who loves mankind, having accepted them on his holy and immaterial Altar above the heavens, as a savour of spiritual fragrance, may send down upon us in return his divine grace and the gift of the Holy Spirit, let us pray.
People: Lord, have mercy.
*Deacon: For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint, let us pray to the Lord.
Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
That the whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let us ask of the Lord.
People: Grant this, O Lord. 
An angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies, let us ask of the Lord.
Pardon and forgiveness of our sins and offences, let us ask of the Lord.
Those things which are good and profitable for our souls, and peace for the world, let us ask of the Lord.
That we may live out the rest of our days in peace and repentance, let us ask of the Lord.
A Christian end to our life, painless, unashamed and peaceful, and a good defence before the dread judgement seat of Christ, let us ask.
*Deacon: Having asked for the unity of the faith and the communion of the Holy Spirit, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ, our God.
People: To you, O Lord.
Priest: Our God, the God of salvation, do You teach us how we may worthily give thanks unto You for all Your benefits which You hast begotten and which You dost beget for us. Do You, O God, having accepted these gifts, cleanse us from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and teach us to perfect holiness in Your fear; that with the testimony of a pure conscience and receiving a portion of Your holy things, we may be united with the sacred Body and Blood of thy Christ: and having received them worthily, we may have Christ dwelling in our hearts, and may become the temple of Your Holy Spirit. Yea, O God, let none of us be made guilty by reason of these fearful and heavenly mysteries, or weak in soul or body through the an unworthy partaking of the same: but grant us even unto our last breath worthily to receive a portion of Your hallowed things, unto provision for the way of eternal life and an acceptable defence at the dread judgement seat of Christ. That we also with all the saints which have been well-pleasing unto You since the world began may be made partakers of Your eternal good things, which You hast prepared for them that love You, O Lord. 

(aloud): And count us worthy, Master, with boldness and without condemnation to dare to call upon you, the God of heaven, as Father, and to say:
THE LORD’S PRAYER
People: Our Father in heaven,* may your name be hallowed,* your kingdom come,* your will be done * on earth as in heaven.* Give us today our daily bread,* and forgive us our debts, * as we forgive our debtors; * and do not lead us into temptation,* but deliver us from the evil one.
Priest (aloud): For yours is the Kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
Priest: Peace to all.
People: And to your spirit.
*Deacon: Let us bow our heads to the Lord.
People: To you, O Lord.
Priest: O Master and Lord, the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, bless, hallow, guard, protect and strengthen them that have bowed their heads unto You: turn them aside from every evil work; unite them to every good work, and grant that they may partake without condemnation of these Your most pure and life-giving mysteries, for the remission of sins and unto the communion of the Holy Spirit.
(aloud): Through the grace and compassion and love towards mankind of your onlybegotten Son, with whom you are blessed, together with your allholy, good and lifegiving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
HOLY COMMUNION OF THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE
Priest: Give heed, Lord Jesus Christ our God, from your holy dwellingplace and from the glorious throne of your kingdom; and come to sanctify us, you who are enthroned on high with the Father and invisibly present here with us. And with your mighty hand grant communion in your most pure Body and precious Blood to us, and through us to all the people.
Then the Priest, and the Deacon, in his usual place, bow three times, saying: God, cleanse me, a sinner.
Then the 
*Deacon: Let us attend.
The Priest elevates the Holy Bread and says aloud:
Priest: The Holy Things for the Holy.
People: One is holy, one is Lord: Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen.
The Singers continue with the Communion Chant.
On Sundays:
Praise the Lord from heaven, praise him in the highest. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. (Psalm 150:1)
On other days as appointed.
The Deacon enters the Sanctuary, ties his orarion in the form of a Cross and standing on the right of the Priest says:
Deacon: Master, break the holy Bread.
The Priest divides the Lamb into four parts, saying:
Priest: The Lamb of God is broken and distributed, broken yet not divided, ever eaten yet never consumed, but sanctifies those who partake.
He arranges them on the Paten in the form of a Cross, thus:
IC
NI       KA
XC
The Deacon points to the Chalice with his Orarion and says:
Deacon: Master, fill the holy Cup.
The Priest takes the portion of the Lamb stamped with the letters IC and makes the sign of the Cross with it above the holy Chalice and places it in it, saying:
Priest: Fullness of the Holy Spirit.
Deacon: Amen.
He takes the hot water and says to the Priest:
Master, bless the hot water.
The Priest blesses it, saying:
Priest: Blessed is the fervour of your holy things, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
The *Deacon pours the hot water into the Chalice in the form of a cross, saying:
Fervour of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

The Priest and the Deacon shal then say the communion prayers:
I believe, O Lord, and confess that You are in truth the Christ, the Son of the living God, come into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. And I believe that this is indeed Your incorruptible body, and this Your most precious blood. Wherefore I pray You have mercy upon me, and forgive me my trespasses, voluntary and involuntary, whether of word or deed, witting or unwitting; and vouchsafe that I may partake without condemnation of Your most pure mysteries, for the remission  of sins and unto life everlasting. Amen.     
Behold I draw near to divine Communion, O Creator, let me not be destroyed thereby; for You are fire to consume the unworthy: the rather do You cleanse me from all that defiles.
Of Your mystical supper, O Son of God, accept me this day as a partaker; for I will not speak of the mystery to Your enemies, nor will I give You a kiss like Judas; but like the thief I will acknowledge You: remember me, O Lord, in Your kingdom.
The blood that makes divine, O man, let it be your fear, let it be your dread: fire it is to consume the unworthy. The divine body doth make me a partaker of the divine nature, and likewise feeds me. Makes the spirit divine and wondrously nourishes the mind.
You hast ravished my heart with Your love, O Christ, Your divine care hath converted my soul. Yet do You consume my sins with celestial fire, and grant me to delight myself in You; that rejoicing I may exalt Your incarnation and Your second coming, O You who are good.
How may I, unworthy as I am, enter into the brightness of Your saints? For if I come boldly to the king’s palace my apparel doth convict me, in that I have no wedding garment, and I shall be bound and cast away by the angels. O Lord, cleanse my soul from all filthiness, and save me for You are loving-kind.
O Master and Lover of Mankind, Lord Jesus Christ, my God, let not these holy things be to my judgement, in that I am unworthy: but rather unto the cleansing and hallowing of soul and body, unto an earnest of life eternal and the kingdom. For I hold it good to cleave to God, to hope in the Lord for my salvation.  
Of Your mystical supper, O Son of God, accept me this day as a partaker; for I will not speak of the mystery to Your enemies, nor will I give You a kiss like Judas; but like the thief I will acknowledge You: remember me, O Lord, in Your kingdom.

The Priest asks the forgiveness of those in the Sanctuary and the rest of the
church. Then he approaches the Holy Table and says: 
Behold, I draw near to Christ, our immortal King and God. 
He takes a portion of the precious Body of Christ, from the part stamped with the letters XC, and says: 
Priest: To me the unworthy Priest [and Monk] N. is granted communion in the precious and all-holy Body of our Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of my sins and for eternal life. 
And he receives the Holy Bread with fear and great care; and having wiped his hand over the Paten with the sponge he says: 
Priest: Deacon, draw near.
 The Deacon, as he approaches, says: 
Deacon: Behold, I draw near to Christ, our immortal King and God. Grant me, Master, communion in the precious and allholy Body of our Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of my sins and for eternal life. 
The Priest gives the Deacon a portion of the Holy Bread from the part stamped with XC and says: 
Priest: To you, most devout Deacon [and Monk] N. is granted communion in the precious and allholy Body of our Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of your sins and for eternal life.
The Deacon kisses the Priest’s hand, goes to the back of the Holy Table, and communicates like the Priest.
Then the Priest takes the Chalice, with the Communion cloth, and says: 
Priest: To me the unworthy Priest [and Monk] N. is granted communion in the precious and all-holy Blood of our Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of my sins and for eternal life. 
He drinks three times from the Chalice, wipes his lips and the Chalice with the cloth, and kisses the Chalice, saying: 
Priest: This has touched my lips: it will take away my iniquities and cleanse my sins.
Then he says: Deacon, again draw near. 
The Deacon, having carefully wiped his hand over the Paten with the Sponge, approaches, saying: 
Deacon: Behold, again I draw near to Christ, our immortal King and God. Grant me, Master, communion in the precious and allholy Blood of our Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of my sins and for eternal life.
The Priest takes the Chalice, with the Communion cloth, and communicates the Deacon three times, saying: 
Priest: To you, most devout Deacon [and Monk] N is granted communion in the precious and all-holy Blood of our Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of your sins and for eternal life.  
Then he says: 
Priest: This has touched your lips: it will take away your iniquities and cleanse your sins.
The Priest divides the two remaining parts of the Lamb (NI and KA) into small pieces The Deacon shall then take up the paten and the sponge and with extreme care shall place the divided particles of the Lamb into the chalice and then all the other particles saying:
Deacon: We have seen the resurrection of Christ, wherefore let us worship the holy Lord Jesus, who alone is without sin. We venerate Your Cross, O Christ, and we praise and glorify Your holy Resurrection. For You are our God: we know no other save You; we call upon Your Name. O Come all ye faithful, let us venerate the holy resurrection of Christ: for behold, through the Cross joy is come to all the world. Evermore blessing the Lord, we sing the praises of His Resurrection: for He endured the Cross on our behalf, death by death hath He destroyed.
Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord hath risen upon thee, celebrate now and be glad, O Zion. And do thou O pure, Mother of God, rejoice in the rising of thy child.
O divine! O beloved! O sweetness of Your voice.! For that thou, O Christ, hast truly promised to be with us till the end of time. Wherefore we the faithful rejoice, holding these Your words as an anchor of hope.
O Christ, O Great and most sacred Passover! O Wisdom, and Word of God, and Power! Grant that we may more truly have communion with You in the day of Your kingdom which knows no eventide.
Wash away, O Lord, the sins of them that have been remembered here, by Your precious Blood, at the prayers of the holy Mother of God and all Your saints. Amen.
DISTRIBUTION OF HOLY COMMUNION
The Holy Doors are opened and the Priest hands the Chalice to the *Deacon, who comes out through the Holy Doors, holding the Chalice, and says:

Deacon: With fear of God, with faith and love, draw near.
The Deacon hands the Chalice to the Priest, who gives Communion to the People, saying to each communicant:
Priest: The Body and Blood Christ, for the forgiveness of sins and everlasting life.
While Communion is being given the following is sung, as many times as is necessary for the number of communicants:
Of your mystical Supper, Son of God, receive me today as a communicant; for I will not tell of the Mystery to your enemies; I will not give you a kiss, like Judas; but like the Thief I confess you: Remember me, Lord, in your Kingdom.
During Eastertide (in some places, always): Receive the Body of Christ; taste from the immortal fount. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.
When all have communicated, the Priest hands the Chalice to the Deacon, who places it on the holy Table again.
The Priest blesses the People with his hand, saying:
O God, save your people, and bless your inheritance.
People: We have seen the true light; we have received the heavenly Spirit; we have found the true faith, as we worship the undivided Trinity; for the Trinity has saved us.
On feasts of the Lord and their leavetaking the Apolytikion of the Feast is sung; during Eastertide Christ has risen from the dead….
Meanwhile the *Deacon holding the Paten above the Chalice carefully wipes the particles remaining on the Paten into the Chalice, saying:
Deacon: Wash away, Lord, by your holy Blood the sins of your servants here remembered, through the prayers of the Mother of God and all your Saints. Amen.
The Deacon says to the Priest: Master, exalt.
The Priest censes the Chalice three times, saying each time:
Priest: Be exalted, O God, above the heavens; and your glory over all the earth.
Then he gives the Paten, with the covers and the Star, to the Deacon, who shows them to the People and then takes them to the table of the Prothesis, going round behind the Holy Table. He then unties his orarion.
The Priest bows, takes the Chalice and says in a low voice: Blessed is our God, and then turns to the People, shows them the Chalice and continues, aloud:
Priest: Always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen. Let our mouth be filled with your praise, O Lord, that we may sing of your glory, for you have counted us worthy to partake of your holy, divine, immortal and lifegiving Mysteries; keep us in your holiness, that we may meditate on your righteousness all the day long. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.
THANKSGIVING AND DISMISSAL
The Priest places the Chalice on the Prothesis, returns, and folds up the Antimension, after making sure that no crumb remains.
The *Deacon comes out through the Holy Doors, goes to his usual place and says:
Deacon: Stand upright. Having received the divine, holy, pure, immortal, heavenly, lifegiving and dread Mysteries of Christ, let us give worthy thanks to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy.
*Deacon: Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.
People: Lord, have mercy.
*Deacon: Having asked that the whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
People: To you, O Lord.
PRAYER OF THANKSGIVING
Priest: We give thanks unto You, O Lord our God, for that You hast suffered us to partake of Your holy, pure, immortal and heavenly mysteries unto the benefit, hallowing and healing of our souls and bodies. Do You, O Master of all, grant that the communion of the Body and Blood of Your Christ be for us unto faith unashamed, unto love without dissimulation, unto the increase of wisdom, unto the healing of soul and body, unto the driving out of every adversary, unto the fulfilling of Your commandments, and unto an acceptable defence at the dread judgement seat of Christ.         
Taking the holy Gospel, he makes the sign of the Cross with it over the folded Antimension and says aloud:
For you are our sanctification, and to you we give glory, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
DISMISSAL
Priest: Let us go forth in peace.
People: In the name of the Lord.
*Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy.
The Priest comes out through the Holy Doors and standing in front of the icon of Christ, or below the Solea in the middle of the Church, reads:
PRAYER BEHIND THE AMBO
O You who dost accept as a sacrifice of praise and a worship pleasing to You, this reasonable and bloodless sacrifice, from them that call upon You with their whole heart, O Christ our God, O Lamb and Son of God, who takes away the sin of the world: the blameless calf, not bearing the yoke of sin and yet of Your own will was sacrificed for us. Who being broken, yet is not divided, who is eaten and never consumed, but sanctifies them that eat thereof. Who in remembrance of Your voluntary passion and Your life-giving resurrection on the third day hast rendered us to be partakers of Your ineffable and heavenly and dread mysteries, Your holy Body and Your precious Blood. Preserve us Your servants, the Deacons, those in authority over us, and all the people here present in Your holiness. And grant us at all times and at every moment to meditate on Your righteousness, that being guided toward Your will and having done that which is well-pleasing to You, we may be accounted worthy to stand on Your right hand when You comes to judge both the quick and the dead. Deliver our brethren in captivity, visit the sick, direct from all danger those at sea, and give rest to the souls of them that have departed before us in the hope of life everlasting, where the light of Your countenance watches over them, and give ear to all that pray for Your help.
For You are the Giver of all good, and to You we ascribe glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen. Blessed be the name of Lord, from this time forth and for evermore (three times).
The Priest returns to the Sanctuary through the Holy Doors, goes to the table of the Prothesis and say, in a low voice:
Priest: Accomplished and perfected in so far as lies in our power is all the mystery of Your dispensation, O Christ our God. For we have held in remembrance Your death; we have seen the figure of Your resurrection; we have been filled with Your immortal life. We have delighted in Your inexhaustible good pleasure, whereof be You pleased to account us all worthy in the world to come, by the grace of Your eternal Father, and Your Holy, good and life-giving Spirit; now and for ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.
*Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy.
The Priest, coming out through the Holy Doors and blessing the People, says:
The blessing of the Lord be upon you, by his grace and love for mankind, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
Priest: Glory to you, Christ God, our hope, glory to you.
Reader: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Holy Master, give the blessing.
Priest:
May (on Sundays: he who rose from the dead,) Christ our true God, through the prayers of his allpure and holy Mother, by the power of the precious and lifegiving Cross, through the protection of the honoured, Bodiless Powers of heaven, through the intercessions of the honoured, glorious Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist, John, of the holy, glorious and allpraised Apostles, of the holy, glorious and triumphant Martyrs, of our venerable and Godbearing Fathers and Mothers, of Saint N. (of the Church), of our father among the saints, Basil the Great, archbishop of Caesarea in Cappadosia, of the holy and righteous forebears of God, Joachim and Anna, of Saint N., whose memory we keep today, and of all the Saints, have mercy on us and save us, for he is good and loves mankind.
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ, our God, have mercy upon us.
People: Amen.
The Priest, blessing the People, says: May the holy Trinity protect you all.
People: O Lord, protect the one who blesses us and sanctifies us, for many years.
The Priest distributes the Antidoron, saying to each recipient:
May the blessing and mercy of the Lord come upon you.
THE END OF THE DIVINE LITURGY OF BASIL THE GREAT




13


