MATINS FOR WEEKDAYS
THE ROYAL OFFICE
After the Dismissal of the Midnight Office the Priest, having made the customary metania to the Superior, or to his stall, enters the sanctuary and makes three bows before the holy Table. He puts on the Epitrachelion and, standing in front of the Holy
Table, intones:
Blessed is our God, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
Reader: Amen.
The Priest blesses the incense and begins to cense the sanctuary and the whole church as usual.
The Reader begins the following Psalms:
Come, let us worship and fall down before the King our God.
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ the King our God.
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King, our God.
Psalm 19
May the Lord hear you in the day of trouble; may the name of the God of Jacob shield you. May he send you his help from the holy place, and support you from Sion. May he remember your every sacrifice, and accept with favour your whole burnt offering. May the Lord give you your heart’s desire, and fulfil your every purpose. We shall rejoice in your salvation, and be magnified in the name of our the Lord our God. May the Lord fulfil all your petitions.
Now I know that the Lord has saved his Christ. He will hear him from his holy heaven; in mighty acts is the salvation of his right hand. Some put their trust in chariots and some in horses, but we will call on the name of the Lord our God. They were fettered and fell, but we have risen and been set upright.
Lord, save the king, and hear us on the day we call upon you.
Psalm 20
The king will rejoice in your power, O Lord, he will exult exceedingly in your salvation. You gave him his heart’s desire; you did not deny him the request of his lips. For you came to meet him with blessings of goodness; you placed a crown of precious stones upon his head. He asked you for life, and you gave him length of days for age on age. Great is his glory because of your salvation; you will place on him glory and majesty. For you will give him blessing for age on age, and make him glad with the joy of your countenance. For the king puts his hope in the Lord, and through the mercy of the Most High he will not be shaken. May your hand light upon all your enemies, and your right hand find out all who hate you. You will make them like a blazing oven at the time of your presence. The Lord will confound them in his wrath and fire will devour them. You will destroy their offspring from the earth, and their seed from among the children of mankind. Because they intended evils against you, and devised plans by which they can in no way succeed. For you will put them to flight; among your remnants you will prepare their presence. Be exalted,
Lord, in your power; we will sing and praise your mighty acts.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (three times).
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins. Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen
Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come; your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread, and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.
Priest: For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
The priest must take care that he is standing beneath the Polyeleos to say this conclusion.
He then enters the sanctuary, puts away the censer and takes his stand in front of the Holy Table.
The Reader says the following Troparia:
Lord, save your people, and bless your inheritance, granting to faithful Christians victory over their enemies, and guarding your commonwealth by your Cross.
Glory.
Lifted up on the Cross of your own will, to the new commonwealth that bears your name grant your mercies, Christ God; make your faithful people glad by your power, granting them victories over their enemies; may they have your help in battle: a weapon of peace, an invincible trophy.
Both now. Theotokion.
Dread Champion who cannot be put to shame, do not despise our petitions, O
Good One. All-praised Mother of God establish the commonwealth of the Orthodox, save your people and give them victory from heaven, for you gave birth to God, O only blessed one.
Priest: Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy. We pray you, hear and have mercy.
Reader: Lord have mercy (x3).
Priest: For you, O God, are merciful, and love mankind, and to you we give glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and to the ages of ages.
WEEKDAY MATINS 3
Reader: Amen. In the name of the Lord, bless Father.
THE SIX PSALMS
Note: The Six Psalms should be read by one reader, not divided between several. They are one of the gerontika, that is the parts normally read by the Superior, and should be allocated to a senior person, such a visiting priest. All should remain standing during the Six Psalms.
Priest: Glory to the holy, consubstantial, life-giving and undivided Trinity, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
Reader: Amen.
And we begin the Six Psalms, listening with complete silence and compunction. The
Superior, or the designated reader, with devotion and fear of God says:1
Glory to God in the highest, and peace on earth, goodwill among men (x3).
Lord, you will open my lips, and my mouth will declare your praise (x2).
Psalm 3
Lord, why have those who afflict me been multiplied? Many rise against me.
Many say to my soul, ‘There is no salvation for him in his God’. But you,
Lord, are my helper, my glory, and the one who lifts up my head. With my voice, I cried to the Lord, and he heard me from his holy mountain. I lay down and slept; I awoke, because the Lord will assist me. I will not be afraid of tens of thousands of people who surround me. Rise, Lord, save me, my
God; because you have struck all who are vainly my foes. You have smashed the teeth of sinners. Salvation is the Lord’s, and your blessing is upon your people.
And again:
I lay down and slept; I awoke because the Lord will assist me.
Psalm 37
Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger, nor chastise me in your wrath. For your arrows have been stuck fast in me, and you have laid a heavy hand upon me. There is no healing in my flesh on account of your wrath, nor peace in my bones on account of my sins. My iniquities flooded over my head; like a heavy burden they weighed heavily upon me. My wounds stank and festered on account of my foolishness. I was wretched and utterly bowed down; I went about mourning all day long. For my loins were filled with mockings, and there is no healing in my flesh. I was maltreated and humiliated exceedingly; I howled from the groaning of my heart. Lord, all my desire is before you, and my groaning was not hidden from you. My heart was troubled, my strength failed me; and even the light of my eyes had gone from me. My friends and my neighbours drew near and stood against me, and those nearest me stood far away. Those who sought my life used force, and those who sought evils for me spoke vanities, and meditated trickeries all day long. But I, like a deaf man, heard nothing; like one who is dumb, who does not open his mouth. So I became like one who cannot hear, and in whose mouth there are no rebukes.
For in you, Lord, I have hoped; you will answer me, O Lord my God. For I said: Let my foes never exult over me. When my foot slipped they crowed over me. For I am ready for blows and my pain is with me continually. For I will declare my iniquity and be troubled at my sin. But my enemies live and have prevailed over me, and those who hate me unjustly have been multiplied.
Those who repay me with evils in place of good have slandered me, since I pursued goodness. Do not forsake me, Lord; my God, do not go far from me. Hasten to help me, Lord of my salvation.
And again.
Do not forsake me, Lord; my God, do not go far from me.
Hasten to help me, Lord of my salvation.
Psalm 62
O God, my God, I watch for you at dawn; my soul has thirsted for you, my flesh how often in a desert, untrodden and waterless land. Thus I appeared before you in the holy place, to see your power and your glory. For your mercy is better than life; my lips will praise you. So I will bless you as long as
I live, and in your name I will lift up my hands. May my soul be filled as with marrow and fatness; my mouth will praise you with joyful lips. When I remembered you upon my bed, every dawn I meditated upon you. For you became my helper, and in the shelter of your wings I shall rejoice. My soul clung to you; and your right hand upheld me. But those who vainly sought my life will go down to the deepest parts of the earth, they will be delivered to the power of the sword, they will be portions for foxes. But the king will rejoice in
God, and all who swear by him will be praised; for the mouths of those who speak iniquities have been stopped.
And again.
Every dawn I meditated upon you, for you became my helper, and in the shelter of your wings I shall rejoice.
My soul clung to you; and your right hand upheld me.
Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit. Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God (x3, without Metanias).
Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.
Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit. Both now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Psalm 87
Lord, God of my salvation, I have cried by day, and by night also before you.
Let my prayer come into your presence, and turn you ear to my supplication.
For my soul was filled with evils, and my life drew near to Hell. I was reckoned
among those that go down to the Pit; I became as one that has no help,
free among the dead. Like the slain that sleep in the tomb, whom you remembered
no more; and they were cut off from your power. They placed me in the
lowest Pit; in darkness and in the shadow of death. Your wrath lay heavy
WEEKDAY MATINS 5
upon me, and you brought all your waves against me. You put my friends far
from me, and made me an abomination to them. I was handed over and I
came out; my eyes grew weak because of my beggary. I cried to you, Lord, all
the day; I stretched out my hands towards you. Will you work wonders for
the dead; or will physicians raise them up again to praise you? Will any declare
your mercy in the tomb, or your truth in the place of destruction? Will
your wonders be known in the dark, or your righteousness in a land that has
been forgotten? But to you, Lord, I have cried, and in the morning my prayer
will come before you. Why have you rejected my soul, Lord; why do you turn
away your face from me? I am poor and in toils since my youth; exalted, I was
humbled and brought to despair. Your fierce anger overwhelmed me, and
your terrors appalled me. They surrounded me like water all day long; they
closed in upon me from every side. Friend and neighbour you have put far
from me, and my companions because of my misery.
And again.
Lord, God of my salvation, I have cried by day; and by night also before you.
Let my prayer come into your presence, and turn your ear to my supplication.
Psalm 1022
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget none of his benefits. He forgives all your
iniquities; he heals all your diseases; he redeems your life from corruption
and crowns you with mercy and compassion; he satisfies your desire with
good things; your youth will be renewed like an eagle’s. The Lord performs
deeds of mercy and judgement for all who are oppressed. He made known his
ways to Moses, his wishes to the children of Israel. The Lord is compassionate
and merciful, long-suffering and full of mercy. He will not always be wrathful,
nor will he be enraged for ever. He has not dealt with us according to our
iniquities, nor rewarded us according to our sins. For, like the height of
heaven above the earth, the Lord has made his mercy prevail over those that
fear him. As far as the east is from the west, so far has he taken our sins from
us. As a father takes pity on his children the Lord has taken pity on those who
fear him. For he knows of what we are made; has remembered that we are but
dust. As for man, his days are but as grass, he will blossom like a flower of the
field; for when a wind has passed over it, it will be no more and will know its
place no longer. But the mercy of the Lord is for ever and ever upon those
who fear him; and his justice upon their children’s children, upon those who
keep his covenant and remember his commandments to do them. The Lord
has prepared his throne in heaven and his kingdom rules over all. Bless the
Lord, all you his Angels, powerful in strength, who perform his word, and
listen to the voice of his words. Bless the Lord, all you his Powers, his Ministers
who do his will. Bless the Lord, all you his works. In every place of his
dominion, bless the Lord, O my soul!
2 The priest comes from the Altar and reads the morning prayers quietly.
6 BOOK OF HOURS
And again.
In every place of his dominion, bless the Lord, O my soul!
Psalm 142
Lord, hear my prayer; in your truth give ear to my supplication, and in your
righteousness hear me. Do not enter into judgement with your servant, for in
your sight no one living can be justified. For the enemy pursued my soul;
humbled my life to the ground; made me dwell in darkness, like those for
ever dead. My spirit in me grew weary, and my heart was troubled within
me. I remembered days of old; I meditated on all your works. I made the
works of your hands my meditation. I stretched out my hands towards you;
my soul thirsted for you like a waterless land. Hear me swiftly, O Lord; my
spirit has failed. Do not turn your face from me, or I shall be like those who go
down to the Pit. Make me hear of your mercy in the morning, for I have
hoped in you. Make known to me the way in which I should walk, for to you I
have lifted up my soul. Deliver me from my enemies, Lord; I have run to you
for shelter. Teach me to do your will, for you are my God. Your good Spirit
will guide me in an upright land. For your name’s sake, O Lord, you will give
me life. In your justice you will bring my soul out of trouble; in your mercy
slay my enemies, and destroy all those who afflict my soul, for I am your servant.
And again.
In your justice hear me, O Lord; and do not enter into judgement with your
servant. (x2)
Your good Spirit will guide me in an upright land.
Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit.
Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God. (x3). Metanias (x3).
During the Six Psalms the Priest reads the Twelve Morning Prayers.
The Priest, having kissed the icon of the Lord, stands in front of the Holy Doors and
intones the:
Litany of Peace
In peace, let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy. And so after each petition.
For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us pray to
the Lord.
For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of the holy Churches of God,
and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.
For this holy house, and for those who enter it with faith, reverence and the
fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.
For our Archbishop N., for the honoured order of presbyters, for the diaconate
in Christ, for all the clergy and the people, let us pray to the Lord.
For our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Family, her Government,
and all in authority, let us pray to the Lord.
WEEKDAY MATINS 7
For our father and superior, Priest-monk N., and all our brotherhood in
Christ.
For this holy monastery, for monastery, city, town and village, and for the
faithful who dwell in them, let us pray to the Lord.
For favourable weather, an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and temperate
seasons, let us pray to the Lord.
For those who travel by land, air or water, for the sick, the suffering, for those
in captivity, and for their safety and salvation, let us pray to the Lord.
For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint, let us
pray to the Lord.
Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.
Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust ourselves and
one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
People: To you, O Lord.
Priest: For to you belong all glory, honour and worship, to the Father, the Son
and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
After the Litany, the following is sung, according to the tone of the Troparion of the
day, by the two choirs alternately:
[A] The Lord is God, and has appeared to us. Blessed is he who comes in the
name of the Lord.
[B] Verse 1: Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good; his mercy endures for
ever.
The Lord is God, and has appeared to us. Blessed is he who comes in the
name of the Lord.
[A] Verse 2: All the nations surrounded me, but in the name of the Lord I
drove them back.
The Lord is God, and has appeared to us. Blessed is he who comes in the
name of the Lord.
[B] Verse 3: This is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes.
The Lord is God, and has appeared to us. Blessed is he who comes in the
name of the Lord.
Then we say the Troparion of the current feast, or of the Saint(s) of the day, twice, together
with the Theotokion for the day of the week in the corresponding Tone.
Then the recitation of the Psalter and the sung Kathismata from the Paraklitiki, or the
Menaion, as appointed.
The Psalter is read as follows. After the Theotokion of the Apolytikion, the Reader begins:
Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy.
Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit.
And the person appointed to read the Psalms continues:
8 BOOK OF HOURS
Both now and for ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.
And then reads the 1st Section [Stasis] of the appointed Kathisma. At the end of the
Section he says:
Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit.
And the Reader continues:
Both now and for ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God. (x3)
Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy.
Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit.
And the person appointed to read the Psalms continues:
Both now and for ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.
And then reads the second section, which ends in the same way. At the end of the 3rd
section, if there is no Short Litany [see below], the reader ends as follows,:
Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit.
Both now and for ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God. (x3)
Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy.
Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit.
Both now and for ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.
But if there is a Short Litany, he ends after
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God. (x3)
If there are Kathismata appointed in the Menaion, the Little Litany is said by the
priest, from his stall, after the reading from the Psalter. If the Kathismata are those
from the Paraklitiki, there are no small litanies during the reading of the Psalter.
The ekphoneses are as follows:
After the 1st Kathisma
For yours is the might and yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of
ages.
After the 2nd Kathisma
For you, O God, are good and love mankind, and to you we give glory, to the
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
THE EVLOGITARIA FOR THE DEPARTED3
Tone 5.
Blessed are you, Lord, teach me your statutes.
3 Said on the Saturdays for the Departed, but in some places on all Saturdays.
WEEKDAY MATINS 9
The choir of Saints has found the source of life and the door of Paradise; may I
too find the way through repentance; I am the lost sheep, call me back, O Saviour,
and save me.
Blessed are you, Lord, teach me your statutes.
You Holy Martyrs, who proclaimed the Lamb of God, and like lambs were
slain, and have been taken over to the unending life which knows no ageing,
plead with him to grant us abolition of our debts.
Blessed are you, Lord, teach me your statutes.
All you who trod in life the hard and narrow way; all you who took the Cross
as a yoke, and followed me in faith, come, enjoy that heavenly rewards and
crowns which I have prepared for you.
Blessed are you, Lord, teach me your statutes.
I am an image of your ineffable glory, though I bear the marks of offences;
take pity on your creature, Master, and with compassion cleanse me; and give
me the longed-for fatherland, making me once again a citizen of Paradise.
Blessed are you, Lord, teach me your statutes.
Of old you formed me from nothing and honoured me with your divine image,
but because I transgressed your commandment, you returned me to the
earth from which I was taken; bring me back to your likeness, my ancient
beauty.
Blessed are you, Lord, teach me your statutes.
Give rest, O God, to your servants, and settle them in Paradise, where the
choirs of the Saints and all the Just shine out like beacons; give rest to your
servants who have fallen asleep, overlooking all their offences.
Glory. Triadikon.
Let us devoutly hymn the threefold light of the one Godhead as we cry: Holy
are you, the Father without beginning, the Son likewise without beginning
and the divine Spirit; enlighten us who worship you in faith, and snatch us
from the everlasting fire.
Both now. Theotokion.
Hail, honoured one, who bore God in the flesh for the salvation of all; through
you the human race has found salvation; through you may we find Paradise,
O pure and blessed Mother of God.
Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia. Glory to you, O God. [x3]
10 BOOK OF HOURS
Then Psalm 50, as follows.
Reader: Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Glory to the
father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit.
The appointed person: Both now and for ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Have mercy on me, O God, in accordance with your great mercy. According
to the multitude of your compassion blot out my offence. Wash me thoroughly
from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. For I acknowledge
my wickedness, and my sin is ever before me. Against you alone I have
sinned and done what is evil in your sight, that you may be justified in your
words and win when you are judged. For see, in wickedness I was conceived
and in sin my mother bore me. For see, you have loved truth; you have shown
me the hidden and secret things of your wisdom. You will sprinkle me with
hyssop and I shall be cleansed. You will wash me and I shall be made whiter
than snow. You will make me hear of joy and gladness; the bones which have
been humbled will rejoice. Turn away your face from my sins and blot out all
my iniquities. Create a clean heart in me, O God, and renew a right Spirit
within me. Do not cast me out from your presence, and do not take your Holy
Spirit from me. Give me back the joy of your salvation, and establish me with
your sovereign Spirit. I will teach transgressors your ways, and sinners will
turn to you again. O God, the God of my salvation, deliver me from bloodshed
and my tongue will rejoice at your justice. Lord, you will open my lips,
and my mouth will proclaim your praise. For if you had wanted a sacrifice, I
would have given it. You will not take pleasure in burnt offerings. A sacrifice
to God is a broken spirit; a broken and a humbled heart God will not despise.
Do good to Sion, Lord, in your good pleasure; and let the walls of Jerusalem
be rebuilt. Then you will be well pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, oblation
and whole burnt offerings. Then they will offer calves upon your altar.
And we begin the Canons.
RECITATION OF THE NINE ODES4
ODE 1
Let us sing to the Lord, for he is greatly glorified.
12. Let us sing to the Lord, for he is greatly glorified; horse and rider he has
cast into the sea.
11. Helper and protector he has become for my salvation; he is my God and I
will glorify him; my father’s God and I will exalt him.
10. The Lord shatters wars, the Lord is his name; Pharaoh’s chariots and army
he has cast into the sea.
9. With the deep he covered them; they sank to the bottom like a stone.
For 8 verses.
4 This is the selection of verses used daily on the Holy Mountain, except in Great Lent.
WEEKDAY MATINS 11
8. Then the leaders of Edom and the rulers of the Moabites hastened; trembling
took hold of them; all the inhabitants of Canaan melted away.
7. Let fear and trembling fall upon them; by the greatness of your arm let
them be turned to stone.
For 6 verses.
6. Till your people pass over, O Lord; till your people, whom you have purchased,
pass over.
5. The sanctuary which you have made, Lord; which your hands have prepared.
For 4 verses.
4. The Lord reigns over the ages and for ever and ever; for Pharaoh’s horse
went with the chariots and horsemen into the sea.
3. But the children of Israel walked on dry land in the midst of the sea.
Glory. Both now.
ODE 3
Holy are you, O Lord, and my spirit sings your praise.
12. My heart is established in the Lord, my spirit is exalted in my God; my
mouth derides my enemies, I rejoice in your salvation.
11. There is none holy like the Lord, and none righteous like our God.
10. Do not boast or talk so very proudly; let no arrogance come from your
mouth.
9. For the Lord is a God of knowledge; and God prepares his ways.
For 8 verses.
8. He grants the prayers of him who prays; and blesses the years of the righteous.
7. The Lord will weaken his adversary; the Lord is holy.
For 6 verses.
6. Let not the wise man boast of his wisdom, nor the powerful boast of his
power, nor the wealthy boast of his wealth.
5. But let him who boasts boast of this; of understanding and knowing the
Lord; and of executing judgement and righteousness in the midst of the
earth.
For 4 verses.
4. The Lord has gone up to the heavens and thundered; being righteous he
will judge the ends of the earth.
3. He will give strength to our kings; and exalt the horn of his anointed ones.
Glory. Both now.
After the 3rd Ode
Priest: Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord.
12 BOOK OF HOURS
People: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.
People: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady,
Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust ourselves
and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
People: To you, O Lord.
Priest: For you are our God, and to you we give glory, to the Father, the Son
and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
ODE 4
Glory to your power O Lord.
12. O Lord, I heard your report and was afraid; Lord I considered your works
and was amazed.
11. When my soul is troubled, in anger you will remember mercy.
10. God will come from Teman; and the Holy One from a shady, wooded
mountain.
9. His glory covered the heavens; and the earth was full of his praise.
For 8 verses.
8. For the fig-tree will not bear fruit, nor will there be produce on the vines.
7. The labour of the olive will deceive, and the fields yield no food.
For 6 verses.
6. The sheep have failed from lack of fodder, and there will be no oxen at the
mangers.
5. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord; I will be joyful in God my Saviour.
For 4 verses.
4. The Lord is my strength; he will perfectly station my feet.
3. And he puts me on high places; for me to conquer with his song.
Glory. Both now.
ODE 5
O Lord our God give us peace.
12. From nightfall my spirit is awake for you, O God; for your commands are
light upon the earth.
11. Learn righteousness, inhabitants of the earth.
10. Let the impious be taken away, that he may not see the glory of the Lord.
O Lord your hand was lifted up and they knew it not; but once they know
they will be ashamed.
9. Jealousy will seize an untaught people; and now fire devours their adversaries.
For 8 verses.
8. Bring evils upon them, O Lord, bring evils upon them; the glorious ones of
the earth.
7. O Lord in affliction we remembered you, with a little affliction you chastised
us.
For 6 verses.
6. As the woman in labour draws near the time of her delivery and cries out in
her labour; so have we been to your beloved.
5. We shall not fall, but they will fall, the inhabitants of the earth.
For 4 verses.
4. The dead shall arise and those in the graves shall be raised; and those in the
earth shall rejoice.
3. For the dew which comes from you is healing for them; but the land of the
impious shall perish.
Glory. Both now.
ODE 6
As you did the prophet Jonas, save us, O Lord.
12. I cried to the Lord; and he heard me.
11. You cast me into the depths of the heart of the sea; and the floods surrounded
me.
10. All your billows and your waves passed over me.
9. Shall I look again towards your holy temple?
For 8 verses.
8. Water encompassed me, even to my soul; the lowest deep closed round me.
7. My head went down to the clefts of the mountains; I descended into the
earth, whose bars are eternal barriers.
For 6 verses.
6. Let my life come up from corruption to you, O Lord my God.
5. And let my prayer come to you, to your holy temple.
For 4 verses.
4. Those who preserve vain and foolish things have forsaken their own Mercy.
3. I will pay you. O Lord, whatever I have vowed, for my salvation.
Glory. Both now.
After the 6th Ode.
Priest: Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.
People: Lord, have mercy.
14 BOOK OF HOURS
Priest: Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady,
Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust ourselves
and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
People: To you, O Lord.
Priest: For you are the King of peace and the Saviour of our souls, and to you
we give glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever,
and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
The Kontakion, Ikos and Synaxarion for the day are read.
ODE 7
Our God and the God of our fathers, blessed are you.
12. Blessed are you, O Lord, the God of our fathers; and praised and glorified
is your name for ever more.
11. For you are righteous in all that you have done for us.
10. And all your works are true, and your ways are right, and all your judgements
are true; and judgements of truth you have executed in all that you
have brought upon us.
9. And upon Jerusalem the city of our fathers.
For 8 verses.
8. Blessed are you, O Lord, the God of our fathers; to be praised and exalted
above all for ever.
7. And blessed is your glorious, holy name; to be praised and exalted above
all for ever.
For 6 verses.
6. Blessed are you in the temple of your glory; to be praised and exalted above
all for ever.
5. Blessed are you who behold the deeps and sit upon the Cherubim; to be
praised and exalted above all for ever.
For 4 verses.
4. Blessed are you on the glorious throne of your kingdom; to be praised and
exalted above all for ever.
3. Blessed are you in the firmament of heaven; to be praised and exalted above
all for ever.
Glory. Both now.
ODE 8
Praise the Lord his works and exalt him above all for ever.
12. Bless the Lord all you works of the Lord, praise the Lord, and exalt him
above all for ever.
11. Bless the Lord Angels of the Lord, praise the Lord, and exalt him above all
for ever.
WEEKDAY MATINS 15
10. Bless the Lord all you waters above the heavens, all you powers of the
Lord, praise the Lord, and exalt him above all for ever.
9. Bless the Lord sun and moon, stars of heaven, praise the Lord, and exalt
him above all for ever.
For 8 verses.
8. Bless the Lord all you birds of the air, beasts and cattle, praise the Lord, and
exalt him above all for ever.
7. Bless the Lord you sons of men. Let Israel bless the Lord, praise the Lord,
and exalt him above all for ever.
For 6 verses.
6. Bless the Lord priests of the Lord and servants of the Lord, praise the Lord,
and exalt him above all for ever.
5. Bless the Lord spirits and souls of the righteous, holy and humble of heart,
praise the Lord, and exalt him above all for ever.
For 4 verses.
4. Bless the Lord Ananias, Azarias and Misael, praise the Lord, and exalt him
above all for ever.
3. Bless the Lord Apostles, Prophets and Martyrs, praise the Lord, and exalt
him above all for ever.
2. We bless Father, Son and Holy Spirit, we praise the Lord, and exalt him
above all for ever.
Both now.
We praise, bless and worship the Lord, praising and exalting him above all for
ever.
When the Katavasia of the 8th Ode is finished the Priest, says in a loud voice:
The Mother of God and Mother of the Light
in hymns let us honour and magnify.
He then censes the whole sanctuary and church as usual.
THE MAGNIFICAT
THE SONG OF THE MOTHER OF GOD.5
A maiden mother hymns her Son and God;
In hymns God’s Mother now we magnify.
[A] My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour.
Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and beyond compare
more glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption
you gave birth to God the Word, truly the Mother of God,
we magnify you.
5 The Magnificat and 9th Ode are traditionally sung by the senior persons present in the two
Choirs. All uncover and come down from their stalls for the Magnificat itself.
16 BOOK OF HOURS
[B] For he has regarded the lowliness of his handmaiden, for behold from
henceforth all generations will call me blessed.
[A] For he that is mighty has done great things for me, and holy is his name,
and his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation.
[B] He has shown strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts.
[A] He has put down the mighty from their thrones and exalted the humble;
he has filled the hungry with good things and the rich he has sent away
empty.
[B] He has helped Israel his servant in remembrance of his mercy, as he spoke
to our fathers, Abraham and his seed for ever.
ODE 9
Zachary blesses the birth of his child.
12. Blessed be the God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people.
11. And has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant
David
10. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, who have been since the
world began. Salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who
hate us.
9. To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy
covenant.
For 8 verses.
8. The oath which he swore to our father Abraham, to grant us that without
fear we, being delivered from the fear of our enemies.
7. Might serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of
our life.
For 6 verses.
6. And you, child, will be called the prophet of the Highest, for you will go
before the Lord to prepare his ways.
5. To give knowledge of salvation to his people by the forgiveness of their sins
through the tender mercy of our God.
For 4 verses.
4. By which the Dayspring from on high has visited us, to appear to those
who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death.
3. To guide our feet into the way of peace.
Glory. Both now.
After the Katavasia of the 9th Ode, we make a full prostration and say:
It is truly right to call you blessed, who gave birth to God, ever-blessed and
most pure and the Mother of our God. Greater in honour than the Cherubim,
and beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption
you gave birth to God the Word; truly the Mother of God, we magnify you.
WEEKDAY MATINS 17
Then the Short Litany.
Priest: Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.
People: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady,
Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust ourselves
and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
People: To you, O Lord.
Priest: For all the Powers of heaven praise you, and to you we give glory, to
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of
ages.
People: Amen.
Then the Exapostilaria.
EXAPOSTILARIA FOR WEEKDAYS
(When none is appointed in the Menaion)
ON MONDAY.
Model Melody. Tone 3 .
As God you adorned the heavens with stars, and through your Angels You
lead the whole earth to the light, O Creator of all things save those who hymn
You.
Theotokion. To the same melody.
Sweetness of the Angels, joy of the afflicted, protectress of Christians, Virgin
Mother of the Lord, help me and deliver me from eternal tortures.
ON TUESDAY.
Tone 3
Let us all hymn John the Forerunner and Baptist of the Saviour, Prophet
among the Prophets, nurseling of the desert, offspring of Elisabeth.
Theotokion. Sweetness of the Angels (as above).
ON WEDNESDAY AND FRIDAY
Tone 2.
The Cross is the guardian of the whole world; the Cross is the beauty of the
Church; the Cross is the strength of kings; the Cross is the support of the faithful;
the Cross is the glory of Angels and the wound of demons.
Cross-Theotokion.
Standing by your Cross, she who bore you without seed lamenting cried out,
‘Alas sweetest child, how have you set from my sight? How have you been
numbered among the dead?’
ON THURSDAY.
Tone 2.
Having sped to every place beneath the sun, you proclaimed the holy incarnation
of Christ from a Virgin, truly turning the nations from error, enlighten18
BOOK OF HOURS
ing them and teaching all to honour the holy Trinity, O Apostles of the Saviour.
To the same melody.
Let us all praise the chief shepherd and high priest, Nicholas the leader of the
people of Myra; for many men he saved who were to die unjustly; and he appeared
to the King in a dream with Avlavios, abolishing the unjust decree.
Theotokion. To the same melody.
Mary, censer of purest gold, having become the vessel of the uncontainable
Trinity; in whom the Father was well-pleased, the Son dwelt, and the all-holy
Spirit, having overshadowed you, showed you, O Maiden, to be Mother of
God.
ON SATURDAY.
As God you have power over the living and the dead, and through your Angels
you lead the whole earth to the light, O Creator of all things save those
who sing your praise.
Theotokion.
In you we boast, Mother of God, and you we have as advocate before God:
stretch out your invincible hand and trounce our foes, send forth your help to
your servants from the holy place.
LAUDS
Psalm 148
[A] Praise the Lord from the heavens; praise him in the highest. To you praise
is due, O God.
[B] Praise him, all his angels: Praise him, all his Powers. To you praise is due,
O God.
[A] Praise the Lord from the heavens; praise him in the highest. To you praise
is due, O God.
[B] Praise him, all his angels: Praise him, all his Powers. To you praise is due,
O God.
[A] Praise him, sun and moon; praise him, all you stars and light.
[B] Praise him, you highest heavens and you waters that are above the heavens.
Let them praise the name of the Lord.
[A] For he spoke and they came into being; he commanded and they were
created.
[B] He established them for ever and ever; he made an ordinance, and it shall
not pass away.
[A] Praise the Lord from the earth; praise him, you sea-monsters and all
deeps;
[B] Fire and hail, snow and ice and storm-wind; things that do his word.
[A] Mountains and all hills, fruiting trees and all cedars;
WEEKDAY MATINS 19
[B] Beasts of the wild, and all cattle, creeping things and winged birds;
[A] Kings of the earth and all peoples, rulers and all judges of the earth;
[B] Young men and maidens: old men and youths together, let them praise the
name of the Lord; for his name alone has been exalted.
[A] His praise is above earth and heaven, and he will exalt the horn of his
people.
[B] A hymn for all his holy ones; for the children of Israel, a people that draws
near him.
Psalm 149
[A] Sing to the Lord a new song, his praise in the Church of the holy ones.
[B] Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, let the children of Sion be joyful in
their king.
[A] Let them praise his name in the dance; let them sing his praise with timbrel
and with harp.
[B] For the Lord is well-pleased with his people; he will exalt the meek with
salvation.
[A] His holy ones will exult in glory, and rejoice upon their beds.
[B] The high praises of God in their mouths, and two-edged swords in their
hands,
[A] To exact vengeance among the nations, punishments among the peoples.
[B] To bind their kings in fetters; and their nobles in shackles of iron.
[A] To execute upon them the judgement that is decreed; such glory will be
for all his holy ones.
Psalm 150
[B] Praise God in his saints; praise him in the firmament of his power.
[A] Praise him for his mighty acts; praise him according to the greatness of his
majesty.
[B] Praise him with the sound of the trumpet; praise him with lute and harp.
[A] Praise him with timbrel and dance; praise him with strings and pipe.
[B] Praise him with tuneful cymbals; praise him with loud cymbals. Let everything
that has breath praise the Lord.
[A] Glory. [B] Both now.
After the Glory, Both now of Lauds, the appointed monk says:
To you glory is due, Lord our God, and to you we give glory, Father, Son and
Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, goodwill among men. We
praise you, we bless you, we worship you, we glorify you, we give you thanks
for your great glory. Lord, King, God of heaven, Father almighty: Lord, only20
BOOK OF HOURS
begotten Son, Jesus Christ and Holy Spirit. Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of
the Father, who take away the sin of the world, have mercy on us; you take
away the sins of the world. Receive our prayer, you who sit on the right hand
of the Father, and have mercy on us. For you alone are holy, you alone are
Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen.
Every day I will bless you, and praise your name for ever and to the ages of
ages. Lord, you have been our refuge from generation to generation. I said,
Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against you. Lord, I
have run to you for refuge: teach me to do your will, for you are my God. For
with you is the source of life: and in your light we shall see light. Continue
your mercy towards those who know you.
Grant, Lord, this day to keep us without sin. Blessed are you, O Lord, the God
of our fathers, and praised and glorified your name to the ages. Amen. May
your mercy, O Lord, be upon us, as we have put our hope in you. Blessed are
you, Lord, teach me your statutes. Blessed are you, Master, make me understand
your statutes. Blessed are you, Holy One, enlighten me with your statutes.
Lord, your mercy is for ever; do not scorn the work of your hands. To
you praise is due, to you song is due, to you glory is due, Father, Son and
Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Litany of Fervent Intercession
Priest: Let us complete our morning prayer to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy. And so after each of the following petitions.
Priest: Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
That the whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let us ask of the
Lord.
People: Grant this, O Lord. And so after each of the following petitions.
Priest: An angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies,
let us ask of the Lord.
Pardon and forgiveness of our sins and offences, let us ask of the Lord.
Things good and profitable for our souls, and peace for the world, let us ask
of the Lord.
That we may live out the rest of our days in peace and repentance, let us ask
of the Lord.
A Christian end to our life, painless, unashamed and peaceful, and a good defence
before the dread judgement seat of Christ, let us ask.
Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust ourselves and
one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
People: To you, O Lord.
Priest: For you are a God of mercy, compassion and love towards mankind,
and to you we give glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and
for ever, and to the ages of ages.
WEEKDAY MATINS 21
People: Amen.
Priest: Peace to all.
People: And to your spirit.
Priest: Let us bow our heads to the Lord.
People: To you, O Lord.
Prayer at the Bowing of Heads
Priest (in a low voice): Holy Lord, dwelling on high and beholding things below
and, with your eye that observes all, keeping watch over the whole creation,
to you we have bowed the neck of our soul and body, and we beseech you, O
Holy of Holies: Stretch forth your invisible hand from your holy dwelling and
bless us all. And, as you are good and love mankind, pardon us if we have
sinned in anything, voluntarily or involuntarily, granting us your blessings
both of this world and of the world above.
(Aloud) For yours it is to have mercy and to save us, O our God, and to you
we give glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever,
and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
Then the Aposticha from the Paraklitiki,
with the following verses, from Monday to Friday.
Verse 1: We have been filled in the morning with your mercy, Lord, we have
rejoiced and been glad. In all our day let us be glad, in return for the days
when you humbled us, for the years when we saw evils. And look on your
servants and on the work of your hands and guide their children.
Verse 2: And may the splendour of the Lord our God be upon us, and direct
the work of our hands for us, and direct the work of our hands.
On Saturdays:
Verse 1. Blessed are those whom you have chosen and taken, O Lord; they will
dwell in your courts.
Verse 2. Their souls will dwell among good things.
Verse 3. And their memorial is from age to age.
Glory. Both now.
The Idiomel, if there is one.
Then the Superior, or the appointed monk says:
It is good to give thanks to the Lord, to sing praises to your name, O Most
High. To declare your love in the morning and your truth every night.
Reader: Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (x3).
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
22 BOOK OF HOURS
All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins. Master,
pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities for your name’s
sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen
Our Father in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread, and
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us into temptation,
but deliver us from the evil one
Priest: For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
Reader: Amen.
The Apolytikion of the day, once. Glory. Both now and the appropriate Theotokion.
The Litany by the Priest.
Priest: Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy, we pray you,
hear and have mercy.
People: Lord, have mercy. Three times after each petition.
Priest: Also we pray for our Archbishop N.
Also we pray for our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the royal family, her
government and all in authority.
Also we pray for our father and superior, Priest-monk N., the Priests, Priestmonks,
Deacon-monks and all our brotherhood in Christ.
Also we pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, visitation, pardon and
forgiveness of sins for the servants of God, all devout and Orthodox Christians,
the benefactors, helpers, worshippers and pilgrims in this holy monastery;
[and for the servants of God N. & N. (Here the Priest may name those for
whom he has been asked to pray), and all who have asked for our prayers, unworthy
though we are.]
Also we pray for the blessed and ever-remembered founders of this holy
monastery, and for all our departed brothers and sisters, Orthodox believers,
who have gone to their rest before us and who here and in all the world lie
asleep in the Lord; [and for the servants of God N. & N. (Here the Priest may
name those for whom he has been asked to pray), and that they may be pardoned
all their offences, both voluntary and involuntary.]
Also we pray for those serve, or who have served in this holy monastery, and
for all our brothers and sisters of the monastic order, who await your great
and rich mercy.
Priest: For you, O God, are merciful, and love mankind, and to you we give
glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the
ages of ages.
People: Amen.
Priest: Wisdom.
WEEKDAY MATINS 23
Reader: Bless.
Priest: Blessed is He Who Is, Christ our true God, always, now and for ever,
and to the ages of ages.
Reader: Amen. May the Lord God strengthen the holy and pure faith of devout
and orthodox Christians, with his holy Church and this sacred Monastery, to
ages of ages.
Priest: Most holy Mother of God, save us.
Reader: Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious
than the Seraphim, without corruption you gave birth to God the Word;
truly the Mother of God, we magnify you.
And at once he begins the First Hour.6
FIRST HOUR
The Holy Doors and the Curtain are shut. The Reader begins straight away with:
O Come, let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.
O Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ, the King, our God.
O Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King, our
God.
Three Metanias and the Psalms:
Psalm 5
Give ear to my words, O Lord, understand my cry. Attend to the voice of my
supplication, my King and my God; for to you I shall pray, O Lord. In the
morning you will hear my voice. In the morning I shall stand before you, and
you will watch over me; because you are not a God who wants iniquity. The
evil-doer will not dwell with you, nor will the lawless remain before your
eyes. You have hated all those who work iniquity; you will destroy all those
who speak lies. The Lord abhors a man of bloodshed and deceit. But I, in the
abundance of your mercy, will enter your house, I will worship towards your
holy temple in fear of you. Guide me, Lord, in your righteousness because of
my enemies, direct my way before you. Because there is no truth in their
mouths; their heart is vain. Their throat is an open tomb, they deceive with
their tongues. Judge them, O God. Let them fall through their counsels; according
to the multitude of their impieties cast them out, for they have embittered
you, O Lord. And may all those who hope in you be glad; they will rejoice
for ever, and you will dwell among them, and all those who love your
name will boast in you. Because you will bless the righteous; you have
crowned him, O Lord, with your good pleasure.
Psalm 89
Lord, you have been our refuge from one generation to another. Before the
mountains came into being or the earth and the world were formed, from age
6 If the First Hour is not said immediately after Matins, the rest of the Dismissal follows here.
24 BOOK OF HOURS
to age you are. Do not turn mankind back to humiliation, and you said: Turn
back, children of men. Because a thousand years in your eyes, Lord, are like a
day, or like yesterday which has passed, and like a watch in the night. Their
years will be mere trifles, in the morning like grass may he pass away. In the
morning let him flower and pass away; in the evening let him fall, dry up and
wither. Because we have perished in your anger, and in your wrath we have
been dismayed. You have set our iniquities before you; our age in the light of
your countenance. Because all our days have perished, and in your anger we
have perished; our years were reckoned like a spider. The days of our years
there are seventy years in them, but if we are strong, eighty, and the majority
of them are labour and toil; because weakness has come over us and we shall
be chastened. Who knows the might of your anger? And can gauge your
wrath from fear of you? So make your right hand known to me, and those
chastened in heart by wisdom. Turn back, O Lord, how long? And be entreated
for your servants. We have been filled in the morning with your
mercy, O Lord, and we have rejoiced and been glad. In all our days let us be
glad; in return for the days when you humbled us, the years when we saw
evils. And look upon your servants and upon the work of your hands and
guide your children. And let the brightness of the Lord be upon us, and direct
the works of our hands for us, and direct the work of our hand.
Psalm 100
I will sing to you of mercy and judgement, O Lord, I will chant and think on a
blameless way. When will you come to me? I have walked in the midst of my
house in the innocence of my heart. I have set no lawless deed before my eyes;
I have hated those who commit transgressions. No twisted heart has been attached
to me; the evil man who avoids me I have not acknowledged. The man
who secretly slanders his neighbour, him I have driven out. With a man of
proud looks and insatiate heart I have not eaten. My eyes are upon the faithful
in the land, for them to dwell with me; the man who walks on a blameless
way, he has ministered to me. The man who acts proudly has not dwelt in my
house; the man who speaks calumnies has not prospered before me. Morning
by morning I slew all the sinners in the land, to purge from the Lord’s city all
workers of iniquity.
Glory. Both now. Alleluia (x3). Lord, have mercy (x3).
Then at once: Glory, the Apolytikion of the day,
Both now, and the following Theotokion:
What shall we call you, O Full of grace? Heaven? For you made the Sun of
righteousness to dawn. Paradise? For you made the flower of incorruption
blossom. Virgin? For you remained incorrupt. Pure Mother? For you held in
your holy embrace a Son who is the God of all. Implore him that our souls
may be saved.
And immediately:
Direct my steps according to your word, and let no iniquity lord it over me.
Deliver me from the slander of men, and I shall keep your commandments.
Let your face shine on your servant, and teach me your statutes.
WEEKDAY MATINS 25
Let my mouth be filled with your praise, O Lord, that I may hymn your glory,
all day long your splendour.
Then:
Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (x3)
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins. Master,
pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities for your name’s
sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen
Our Father in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread, and
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us into temptation,
but deliver us from the evil one
Priest: For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
Reader: Amen.
The Kontakion of the Saint, if there is one, or of the current Feast, or of the day of the
week.
Then: Lord, have mercy (x40).
At every time and at every hour, in heaven and on earth worshipped and glorified,
Christ God, long-suffering, great in mercy, great in compassion, loving
the just and merciful to sinners, calling all to salvation by the promise of the
blessings to come; do you, Lord, yourself accept our entreaties at this hour,
and direct our lives to your commandments. Sanctify our souls, purify our
bodies, correct our thoughts, cleanse our ideas and deliver us from every distress,
evil, and pain. Wall us about with your holy Angels, that protected and
guided by their host we may reach the unity of the faith and the knowledge of
your unapproachable glory; for you are blessed to the ages of ages. Amen.
Lord, have mercy (x3). Glory. Both now.
Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious
than the Seraphim, without corruption you gave birth to God the Word, truly
the Mother of God we magnify you. In the name of the Lord, give the blessing,
Father.
Priest: May God take pity on us and bless us; show the light of his countenance
on us and have mercy on us.
Then the Superior says following prayer:
Christ, the true light, who enlighten and hallow everyone who comes into the
world, may the light of your countenance be signed upon us, that in it we may
see your unapproachable light; and direct our steps to the doing of your
26 BOOK OF HOURS
commandments; at the intercessions of your most pure Mother and of all your
Saints. Amen.
Reader:
To you my Champion and Commander I your City saved from disasters dedicate,
O Mother of God, hymns of victory and thanksgiving; but as you have
unassailable might from every kind of danger now deliver me, that I may cry
to you: Hail, Bride without bridegroom!
And Dismissal.
Glory to you, Christ God, our hope, glory to you.
Reader: Glory. Both now. Lord, have mercy (x3) .Give the blessing.
Priest: May Christ our true God, at the prayers of his most pure and spotless
Mother; of the holy, glorious and all-praised Apostles; of the holy, glorious
and triumphant Martyrs; of our venerable and godbearing Fathers; of Saint N.
[the patron of the church]; [of Saint N., whose memory we celebrate; of the holy
and righteous forebears of God, Joachim and Anne;] and of all the Saints, have
mercy and save us, for he is good and loves mankind.
In the monasteries of the Holy Mountain it is customary for the following dialogue
to be added at the end of the Dismissal.
[A] Accept, Lord, the supplication of us sinners, and have mercy on us.
[B] May your mercy, Lord, be upon us, as we have put our in hope in you.
[A] Eternal your memory, blessed and ever remembered Founders.
[B] Eternal your memory.
Turning to the East, he says,
Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have
mercy on us.
People: Amen.
NOTE ON THE APOSTLE AND GOSPEL
If the Liturgy is not celebrated, it is customary to read the Apostle and Gospel
of the day at the end of the First Hour, after the prayer, ‘Christ the true light’.
The Litany of Fervent Intercession, ‘Let us all say’, is omitted at Matins and
said after the Gospel. The Dismissal follows the Litany.
[If the First Hour is not said, the Apostle and Gospel may be read immediately
after the Apolytikion and its Theotokion at the end of Matins, before the
final Litany and Dismissal.]
NOTE ON THE SINGING OF THE CANONS
The Canons are dealt with in a number of different ways in different churches
and monasteries. On the Holy Mountain the most complete method is as follows.
The odd numbered Odes are begun by the first choir and the even by the
second.
WEEKDAY MATINS 27
On ordinary days, including Sundays, the first choir sings the Irmos from
the 1st Canon in the Paraklitiki, the second sings an appropriate verse [normally
‘Glory to you, our God, glory to you’] and then the first Troparion of
the Canon.
The first choir then sings the first verse from the Biblical Canticle and the
second troparion. The rest of the Ode is sung in the same way.
The Ode from the first Canon in the Paraklitiki normally consists of an Irmos
and 5 Troparia, the second of 4 Troparia and that from the Menaion of 4.
The total should therefore always come to 14. There are 12 verses from the
Biblical canticle, hence the need for a simple refrain before the first troparion.
The Irmos is always sung without any preliminary verse or refrain. Only the
Irmos of the first Canon is sung.
If the Typikon directs that the Irmi are to be doubled, which occurs on
more important feasts, then the Irmos is sung twice, once by each choir, with
no ‘refrain’.
If the Saint of the day is ‘feasted’, that is has at least one Doxastikon at
Vespers, then his, her or their Canon is sung to six, not four, two troparia being
sung twice, and two troparia from the Canons in the Paraklitiki are
dropped, normally those to the Martyrs in the first Canon. If two Canons from
the Menaion are prescribed, then the second Canon from the Paraklitiki is
omitted.
On the feasts when the Paraklitiki is not used, the first canon is normally
the Little Canon of Supplication to the Mother of God. Some feasts have their
own Canon to the Mother of God.
On Saturdays the first canon in the Paraklitiki, to the Prophets and Martyrs,
is traditionally replaced by that of the patron of the church or monastery.
These rules cannot be complete, since many canons have more troparia
than usual in some odes, or on occasion fewer. This means that sometimes a
troparion has either to be omitted or doubled. It is the duty of the Canonarch
to ensure that mistakes are not made and that the count is always fourteen.
At the end of the 3rd, 6th, 8th and 9th Odes, the Irmos of the last Canon,
normally that from the Menaion, is sung as Katavasia.