ORDINATIONS AND ELEVATIONS

ORDER OF MAKING A READER

ORDER FOR THE ORDINATION OF A DEACON

After the Bishop has said the ekphonesis: And the mercies of our great God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, shall be with all of you, [two Subdeacons take the candidate to the middle of the church, with one hand on his neck and with the other holding his hands; and they bow him as low as possible. One Deacon in the Sanctuary says 
Deacon: Give the order. 
They bring the candidate forward and bow him down again; and another Deacon says: 
Deacon: Give the order. 
They bring him near the Holy Doors and bow him low before the Bishop, who is seated on his small throne in front of the Altar, slightly to the left. The Archdeacon says: 
Archdeacon: Give the order, Holy Master.
Then two Deacons come from the Sanctuary and take the one who is to be ordained Deacon, who is standing on the Solea, and bring him into the Sanctuary, circling the Altar as they sing the following Troparia, [which are repeated by the Singers]:

ORDINATION HYMNS
Grave Tone
Choir: O Holy Martyrs, whose example and whose deeds have won the crown of glory. Do intercede before our Lord, that he may have mercy on our souls evermore.

Grave Tone
Glory to you, O Christ our God, crown of all Apostles. The martyrs did with joy proclaim, that the Trinity was One in essence evermore.

Plagal of the Second Tone
Isaiah rejoice, for the Virgin did conceive. And bore the son whom thou called Emmanuel, who is both God and Man, and “Day-at-the-Dawn”(Oriental) is His name. Which is magnified with the Virgin hymned as blessed.

[The candidate each time kisses the four corners of the Altar and knee of the Bishop on his epigonation.]

Then he approaches the Bishop and is signed three times on the head. After this the Bishop orders him to be ungirded and the towel to be removed. Then the one to be ordained leans his forehead [on his hands, which he has laid crossed and palms downward] on the Holy Table and bends his right knee. When the Archdeacon has exclaimed Let us attend, the Bishop, with his right hand placed on the head of the ordinand, declaims:

Deacon: Let us attend
Archbishop: Divine grace, which always heals what is infirm and completes what is lacking, ordains N., the most devout Subdeacon, as Deacon. Let us therefore pray for him, that the grace of the All-Holy Spirit may come upon him.

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord
And at once Lord, have mercy is chanted three times by those in the Sanctuary [by those on the right and three times by those on the left] and [in the same way] by those outside. The Bishop signs his head three times, and when the Deacon has said Let us pray to the Lord, the Bishop, with his hand on the head of the ordinand prays as follows in a low voice:

Archbishop: Lord, our God, by your foreknowledge you send down the gift of your Holy Spirit upon those who are appointed by your inscrutable power to become ministers and to assist in the service of your most pure Mysteries. Keep this man also, Master, whom you have been well pleased to ordain through me to the ministry of the Diaconate, in all soberness, holding the mystery of faith with a pure conscience. Give him the grace which you gave to Stephen the Protomartyr, whom you also called first to the work of your service. Count him worthy to administer in accordance with what is well pleasing to you the rank that has been given him by your loving kindness — for those who have served well, gain for themselves a fair rank — and show him to be your perfect servant. For yours is the Kingdom and the power and the glory, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

After the Amen the Archdeacon says in a quiet voice, such that the Deacons present can hear and respond, the following Diaconal Litany:

Archdeacon: In peace, let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of the holy Churches of God, and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.

For our Archbishop N., for his Priesthood, for help, continuance, peace, health, salvation and for the work of his hands, let us pray to the Lord.

For the servant of God N., who is now ordained Deacon, and for his salvation, let us pray to the Lord.

That our God who loves mankind will grant that his Diaconate may be without spot or blemish, let us pray to the Lord.

For our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Family, her Government, and all in authority, let us pray to the Lord.

For this city, for every city, town and village, and for the faithful who dwell in them, let us pray to the Lord.

For favourable weather, an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and temperate seasons, let us pray to the Lord.

For those who travel by land, air or water, for the sick, the suffering, for those in captivity, and for their safety and salvation, let us pray to the Lord.

For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint, let us pray to the Lord.

Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

While this is being said the Bishop, keeping his hand on the head of the candidate, prays as follows in a low voice:

Archbishop: God our Saviour, with your immortal voice you laid down for your Apostles the law of the Diaconate and declared the Protomartyr Stephen to be one, and proclaimed him the first to fulfill the work of the Deacon, as it is written in your Holy Gospel: Whoever wishes to be first among you, let him be your deacon. Master of all things, fill this servant of yours, whom you have counted worthy to enter upon the ministry of the Deacon, with all faith, love, power and sanctification by the indwelling of your holy and life-giving Spirit; for it is not by the laying on of my hands, but by the visitation of your rich acts of compassion that grace is given to your worthy ones, so that he, having become free of every sin, may take his stand before you without blame on the dread day of your judgment, and receive the unfailing reward of your promise. For you are our God, and to you we give glory, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and forever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

And after the Amen he places the Orarion of the newly ordained on his left shoulder, saying: Axios! And this is normally chanted three times by those in the Sanctuary, and three times by the Singers.

[Then the Bishop gives him the Cuffs, likewise saying: Axios! And this is normally chanted three times by those in the Sanctuary, and three times by the Singers.]

Then the Bishop gives him a Fan, likewise saying: Axios! [And this is normally chanted three times by those in the Sanctuary, and three times by the Singers.] And all the Deacons kiss him.

The newly ordained, taking the Fan, stands on the right-hand side of the Holy Table and fans above the Holy Things. The other Deacon stands outside the Sanctuary and says:

Having commemorated all the Saints, again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord, etc.

At the moment of Communion the newly ordained Deacon partakes of the divine Mysteries first, before all the other Deacons, and says the Diaconal Litany in its place, that is to say:

Stand upright. Having received the holy, divine, immortal, etc.

This is the order when there is a complete Liturgy. But when the ordination takes place at the Liturgy of the Presanctified, it is to be noted that after the Presanctified Gifts have been placed on the Holy Table, before the Deacon says: Let us complete our evening prayer to the Lord, the candidate is brought forward and the Ordination takes place as we have described.

THE OFFICE USED AT THE ELEVATION OF AN ARCHDEACON, OR A PROTO – DEACON.
After the Bishop has said:
DEACON:	Lets us pray to the Lord
BISHOP:	O Master, Lord our God, who have bestowed upon our race the Archdeaconship, granting, through your unspeakable providence, that they who are endued therewith may order and serve your Divine Mysteries as lesser ministers; Do you, the same Lord, endued with this grace  of the Archdeaconship this your servant, (name), and adorn him with your integrity, to stand at the head of the Deacons of your people, and to be an example of good to those who are under him. Cause him to attain unto a ripe old age, that he may magnify your glorious Name, of the Father, and of the son and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever and unto the ages of ages. Amen.

BISHOP:	Blessed is the Lord, the servant of God, (name) becomes an Archdeacon: In the Name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
CHOIR:	Amen
BISHOP:	Axios! (Worthy!) x 3.
CHOIR:	Axios!.

ORDER FOR THE ORDINATION OF A PRESBYTER

After the completion if the Cherubikon, the one who is to be ordained Presbyter stands on the solea, two Deacons take the candidate on either side [to the middle of the church, with one hand on his neck and with the other holding his hands; and they bow him as low as possible. One Deacon says Give the order. They bring him forward and bow him down again; and another Deacon says: Give the order.] They bring him near the Holy Doors and bow him low before the Bishop, who is seated on his small throne in front of the Altar. The Archdeacon says: Give the order, Holy Master. Then they let him go and two Presbyters, the first and second in rank, come from the Sanctuary and take the one who is to be ordained Presbyter, who is standing on the Solea, and bring him into the Sanctuary, circling the Altar as they sing the following Troparia[, which are repeated by the Singers]:

ORDINATION HYMNS
Grave Tone
O Holy Martyrs, whose example and whose deeds have won the crown of glory. Do intercede before our Lord, that he may have mercy on our souls evermore.

Grave Tone
Glory to you, O Christ our God, crown of all Apostles. The martyrs did with joy proclaim, that the Trinity was One in essence evermore.

Plagal of the Second Tone
Isaiah rejoice, for the Virgin did conceive. And bore the son whom thou called Emmanuel, who is both God and Man, and “Day-at-the-Dawn”(Oriental) is His name. Which is magnified with the Virgin hymned as blessed.

Note that when they sing the troparion Holy Martyrs the Bishop takes his seat in front of the Holy Table on a small throne, and when, as they circle the Holy Table, they come in front of the Bishop they make a metania, and the one to be ordained kisses the Bishop’s knee above the Omophorion [Epigonation].

Then the Bishop stands up and the one to be ordained approaches the Bishop and is signed three times on the head. Then the ordinand leans his forehead [on his hands, which he has laid crossed and palms downward] on the Holy Table and kneels on both knees. When the Deacon has exclaimed Let us attend, the Bishop, with his right hand placed on the head of the ordinand, declaims:
Deacon: Let us attend

Archbishop: Divine grace, which always heals what is infirm and completes what is lacking, ordains N., the most devout Deacon, as Presbyter. Let us therefore pray for him, that the grace of the All-Holy Spirit may come upon him.

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord
And at once Lord, have mercy is chanted three times by those in the Sanctuary [by those on the right and three times by those on the right]and [in the same way] by those outside. The Bishop again signs his head three times, and when the Deacon has said Let us pray to the Lord, the Bishop, with his hand on the head of the ordinand prays as follows in a low voice:

Archbishop: O God, without beginning and without end, you are older than all creation, and have honoured with the title of ‘Presbyter’ those who have been found worthy of this rank to minister the word of your truth. Master of all things, be well pleased for this man, who, because of his unblemished way of life and unswerving faith, you have been well pleased to be appointed through me, to receive this great grace of the Holy Spirit. Show your servant to be perfect, by being well-pleasing to you in all things, and living in a manner worthy of this great honour of the Priesthood that has been given him by your providential power. Because yours is the might, and yours is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

After this Prayer the First Priest says in a quiet voice, such that those present can hear and respond, the following Diaconal Litany:
1st Priest: In peace, let us pray to the Lord.
For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.
For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of the holy Churches of God, and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.
For our Archbishop N., for his Priesthood, for help, continuance, peace, health, salvation and for the work of his hands, let us pray to the Lord.
For the servant of God N., who is now appointed Presbyter, and for his salvation, let us pray to the Lord.
That our God who loves humankind will grant that his Priesthood may be without spot or blemish, let us pray to the Lord.
For our Nation, and all in civil authority, let us pray to the Lord.
For this city, for every city, town and village, and for the faithful who dwell in them, let us pray to the Lord.
For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint, let us pray to the Lord.
Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.
Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.
While this is being said the Bishop, keeping his hand on the head of the candidate, prays as follows in a low voice:

Archbishop: Lord God, great in power and unsearchable in understanding, wonderful in counsel above all the children of humankind, fill with the gift of your Holy Spirit this man, whom you have been well-pleased to let enter the rank of Presbyter, that he may become worthy to stand without blemish before your Altar, to proclaim the Gospel of your Kingdom, to minister the word of your truth, to offer gifts and spiritual sacrifices, to renew your People through the washing of rebirth, so that, when he meets the second coming of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ, your only-begotten Son, he may in your great goodness receive the reward of his good stewardship of his own order. For blessed and glorified is your all-honoured and majestic name, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and forever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

And after the Amen he stands him up and brings the back of  the Orarion of the newly ordained to the front over his right shoulder, saying: Axios! [Then he vests him with the Belt, having told him to bless it first, saying again, Axios!] Then he vests him in the Phelonion in the same way, again proclaiming, Axios! And those in the Sanctuary, and the Singers chant the same.

The newly-ordained kisses the Bishop and the Presbyters and then goes and takes his stand with the Presbyters, reading the Scroll.

The Deacon stands in his usual place and says, Let us complete our prayer to the Lord.

When the Holy Gifts have been perfected and the Bishop is about to say, So that those who partake, the newly ordained comes forward and the Bishop gives him the Holy Bread [on the Sponge], saying to him,

Bishop: Take this gage, and guard it until the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, when you are going to be asked for it back by him.

The newly ordained takes and goes to the place where he was standing before, placing his hands on the Holy Table and saying to himself, Lord, have mercy, and, Have mercy on me, O God [Psalm 50].

When the Bishop is about to say, The Holy Things for the holy, the newly ordained gives back the Holy Bread and is the first to receive Communion from the Bishop before all the rest. He also says the Prayer behind the Ambo.

[It is customary for the newly ordained to be asked by the Bishop to distribute the Antidoron]

ORDER OF ELEVATION OF A PROTO-PRESBYTER

THE FORM AND MANNER OF MAKING AN ARCHMANDRITE.
DEACON:	Lets pray to the Lord
BISHOP:	(In low voice)
O Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God, who has bestowed the priesthood upon our race, and has endued us with the grace of this gift and honour, and has appointed us who are duly devout to exercise command over the members of the priesthood, and the other servitors in lesser degree of your Mysteries: Endue you now, also with your grace, our brother (name), and adorn him with integrity; that he may stand at the head of the priest of your people, and enable him to set a good example to those  who are with him; and graciously grant that he may attain, in piety and veneration, unto a good old age, and have mercy upon us all, inasmuch as you are a good God.
(Aloud)
For you are the bestower of wisdom; and unto you do all creation sing praises unto ages of ages.
CHOIR:	Amen.
BISHOP:	Blessed is the Lord, the servant of God, (name), is made an Archimandrite of God’s Holy Church, (name), in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit
CHOIR:	Amen.
BISHOP:	Axios! (worthy) x 3.
PRIE/DEA:	Axios! (x3)
CHOIR:	Axios! (Worthy!)
PRIE/DEA:	Axios! (x3)
CHOIR:	Axios! (x3).

ORDER OF MAKING A CONFESSOR

Note: The service may be performed as a small service on its own, but in practice it is said at the end of Vespers after the Trisagion or Matins after the Doxology. When the service is joined to these services, the Bishop shall not say the opening blessing “Blessed is our God”, neither is it necessary to repeat the Trisagion or to have a separate dismissal from the main service.
 
BISHOP: Blessed is our God, always, now and for ever and unto the ages of ages
CHOIR: Amen.
READER: O Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal, have mercy upon us. (3)
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Most Holy Trinity, have mercy upon us; O Lord, cleanse us from our sins; O Master, pardon our transgressions; O Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities, for Thy Name’s sake.
Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and unto the ages of ages Amen.
Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be Thy Name, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
BISHOP: For Yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and unto the ages of ages
CHOIR: Amen.
The candidate Priest is held by two Deacons or a Priest and Deacon and led to the middle of the Church [or Solea]  facing the Bishop's throne. The Deacon shall then exclaim:
DEACON: The servant of God the reverent Priest [Name] is offered to be appointed a Spiritual Father.
Command.
Give the Command.
Command Holy Master.
And the Priest is brought before the Bishop. The Bishop shall then place his Epitrachelion upon the kneeling Priest's head and the Deacon shall say:
DEACON: Let us pray unto the Lord.
CHOIR: Lord have mercy.
BISHOP: O Lord, Jesus Christ our God,  who did grant apostolic and spiritual ministry unto Peter and the other eleven disciples, and gave them command to loose and to bind the transgressions of men, Through my wretchedness, do You also now, show forth your servant [Name] who verily has been elected by me, but also through all grace made prefect, to also be accounted worthy of Your apostolic and spiritual ministry, to loose and to bind the transgressions of the unworthy. 
For  You are the giver of all good and to You we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and unto the ages of ages
CHOIR: Amen.
And straightway the Reading from the Gospel.
DEACON: Wisdom. Stand steadfast. Let us hear the Holy Gospel.
BISHOP: Peace unto all.
The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to St. John 20:19-31
DEACON: Let us give heed.
CHOIR: Glory be to Thee, O our God, glory be to Thee.
BISHOP: The same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and said unto them, Peace be unto you. And when he had so said, he shown unto them his hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the LORD. Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: as my Father has sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and said unto them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit: Whosoever sins you remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosoever sins you retain, they are retained. 
CHOIR: Glory be to Thee, O our God, glory be to Thee.
And then again the Bishop prays:
Our humbleness, through the grace of the all holy and consummating Spirit, appoints (ordains)  the Reverent (Name) Spiritual father, unto the office of spiritual paternity, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Amen. 

And the Dismissal. 
BISHOP:  Glory to you, O our God, glory to you.
May [He who is risen from the dead] Christ our true God, by the prayers of His Most Holy Mother, of the holy and All-glorious Apostles, of the holy and righteous ancestors of God Joachim and Anna, [Name of the saint to whose memory we dedicate this day], and of all the saints, have mercy upon us and save our souls, for He is good and loves mankind.
By the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy upon us and save us.
CHOIR: Amen.
PRIEST: By the prayers of our holy Master [Bishop], Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy upon us and save us.
CHOIR: Amen.


THE SACRED MYSTERY OF ORDINATION TO THE EPISCOPATE.

The Holy Episcopate is the third and highest order of ministry in the Orthodox Christian Church, the other two being, in descending order, the Priesthood and the Diaconate. Ordination to each of these
ministries takes place within the context of the Divine Liturgy, each at a different liturgical moment. A Deacon is ordained by a Bishop late in the Liturgy, following the Consecration of the Holy Gifts, because his role is to assist with the distribution of Holy Communion. A Deacon is elevated to Presbyter by a Bishop prior to the Consecration, because it is his distinguishing grace to invoke the Holy Spirit. A Bishop is ordained before the Scriptural readings, because it is his special role to preach and teach the Gospel, and also in order to ordain others. Whereas a single Bishop suffices for the ordination of a Deacon or Priest, the Holy Canons require that at least three Bishops participate in the elevation of a Priest to the Episcopacy.

An Episcopal ordination begins before the Divine Liturgy, when the Bishop-elect, vested in an epitrachelion and phelonion and carrying the Holy Gospel, is escorted by two deacons through the Royal Doors to the center of the Solea. There the Archbishop and his concelebrant Hierarchs are seated on their thrones, facing the Sanctuary. The Bishop-elect opens the Holy Gospel and reads a document containing his Confession of Faith.

THE CONFESSION OF FAITH
After the Archbishop enters the Altar, the Bishop-Elect receives the blessing of the Archbishop and puts on the epitrachelion, phelonion and pectoral cross. When the Archbishop is ready to exit the Altar after the Doxology, the two senior Deacons exit through the Royal Doors and exclaim three times:

Deacon: High Priests [Hierarchs] come forth!
The celebrating Hierarchs exit while the clergy sing in the traditional Prostopinia, the Tropar of Pentecost. The Hierarchs take their places in the order of seniority. At the conclusion of the Tropar, the two senior deacons return to the Altar through the Royal Doors, and when they have made a metanoia, they bring the Bishop-Elect, who is holding the Gospel Book in his hands, to the “tail” (the back portion) of the Aetos and the first Deacon intones:

Deacon: Let us attend!

Then the Archbishop addresses the Bishop-Elect, saying:
Archbishop: Why have you come here and what do you seek from us?
The Bishop-Elect answers:
Bishop-Elect: The ordination of the Hierarchal grace.

The Archbishop then asks:
Archbishop: And what do you believe?
Then the Bishop-Elect opens the Gospel Book and says:
Bishop-Elect: I, (N)  …, by the mercy of God, Bishop-elect of the Holy Diocese of (N), of the Patriarchate of Alexandria & All Africa, duly declare by the signing with my own hand that:

I believe in one God, Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth, and of all things visible and invisible.
And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten of the Father before all ages; Light of Light, true God of true God, begotten, not created, of one essence with the Father, through Whom all things were made. Who for us men and for our salvation came down from heaven and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary and became man. He was crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered and was buried; And He rose on the third day, according to the Scriptures. He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the Father; And He will come again with glory to judge the living and the dead; His kingdom shall have no end. And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Creator of life, Who proceeds from the Father, Who together with the Father and the Son is worshipped and glorified, Who spoke through the prophets. In one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church. I confess one baptism for the forgiveness of sins. I look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the age to come. Amen.

Then the Deacons, after making a metanoia, bring the Bishop-Elect before the Archbishop while they say:
The Archdeacon: Give the Command!
The 2nd deacon: Command!
The Archdeacon: Give the command, O Holy Master, for the one who is presented before you!

The Archbishop blesses the Bishop-Elect with the sign of the Cross as he says:

Archbishop: The grace of the Holy Spirit be with you.

Choir: Eis Polla Eti (Many Years)
The Bishop-Elect kisses the hand of the Archbishop and in turn by ranking, the hands of all the concelebrating Hierarchs. As he kisses their hands, the Hierarchs kiss his forehead (and shoulders). When this action is completed, the Deacons return the Bishop-Elect to the Aetos, where this time he stands in the center of it. The Archbishop then says:

Archbishop: Further declare to us your adherence to the Ecumenical Councils and the Sacred Canons of the Holy Church.
The Bishop-Elect continues as follows:

Bishop-Elect: Furthermore, I express my agreement and acceptance of the Seven Holy and Ecumenical Councils, and of those Local Councils that were accepted and confirmed by the Ecumenical Councils, which were assembled to protect the Orthodox dogmas of the Church. I confess all definitions of the Right Faith and the Sacred Canons that were expounded by the Ecumenical Councils, as being guided by the illuminating Grace of the All-Holy Spirit. The blessed Assemblies delivered them to the Church for the adornment of the Holy Church of Christ, for the good ordering of morals in accordance with Apostolic traditions, and for the understanding of the teaching of the divine Gospel. All these I embrace with my whole heart and I will take care to guide the ministry allotted to me by divine will, and in accordance with them I will persevere in teaching all these things to the sacred Clergy and chosen People of the Lord who are entrusted to my spiritual flock. And most diligently, it is my confession that I safeguard the unity of the faith in the bond of peace, and that whatever the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church of the Orthodox dogmatizes and honors, I also honor and will in no way alter – neither dogmas nor traditions, but adhering to them and teaching and preaching them in the fear of God and with a clear conscience; and whatever has been condemned and rejected as being a strange teaching, those I also forever reject and renounce.

Then the two first-ranking priests bring the Bishop-Elect before the
Second-ranking Hierarch while they say:
1st Priest: Give the Command!
2nd Priest: Command!
1st Priest: Give the command, O Holy Master, for the one who is presented before you!

The Second-ranking Hierarch blesses the Bishop-Elect with the sign of the Cross as he says:

2nd Hierarch: May the grace of the All-Holy and Life-creating Holy Spirit be with you, now and forever, and unto the ages of ages.

Choir: Eis Polla Eti (Many Years)
The Bishop-Elect kisses the hand of the Second-ranking Hierarch, then the Archbishop’s, and in turn by ranking, the hands of all the
concelebrating Hierarchs. As he kisses their hands, the Hierarchs kiss his forehead (and shoulders). When this action is completed, the Priests return the Bishop-Elect to the Aetos, where this time he
stands at the top of it.

The Archbishop then says:
Archbishop: Further declare to us how you will preserve the peace of the Holy Church.

The Bishop-Elect continues as follows:

Bishop-Elect: I also promise to preserve the peace of the Church, and not to devise anything whatsoever which is contrary to it all the days of my life; and that I will, in all things, follow and obey His All-Holiness, the Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew, Archbishop of Constantinople and New Rome. Furthermore I promise, in the fear of God and with a reverend disposition, to maintain myself to the best of my ability unsullied by any evil intentions. I do also hereby affirm that I will uphold as inviolate and irrefutable whatever prerogatives and privileges belong to the Apostolic, Patriarchal and Ecumenical Throne, until my last breath. I, (N).., by the mercy of God, Bishop-elect of the Holy Diocese of (....), of the Orthodox Diocese of  (..)  humbly submit this, my confession of faith, signed by my own hand.

Then the Bishop-Elect returns the Holy Gospel to the Altar Table and signs the Confession of Faith. He removes the signed Confession of Faith from the Holy Gospel, places it in the Red Velvet folder, and is led by the two priests from the Altar Table to stand again at the top of the Aetos. The Bishop-Elect is then led by the two priests to the Archbishop to whom he submits his signed Confession of Faith, while the priests say:

1st Priest: Give the Command!
2nd Priest: Command!
1st Priest: Give the command, O Holy Master, for the one who is presented before you!

Then the two first-ranking priests bring the Bishop-Elect before the Third-ranking Hierarch, who blesses the Bishop-Elect with the sign of the Cross as he says:

3rd Hierarch: The grace of the Holy Spirit, through my humble person, proposes Your Grace, the Presbyter and Bishop-Elect, to be the Bishop of the Holy Diocese of (..), of the Patriarchate of Alexandria & All Africa.

Choir: Eis Polla Eti (Many Years)
The Bishop-Elect kisses the hand of Third-ranking Hierarch, then the Archbishop’s, and in turn by ranking, the hands of all the concelebrating Hierarchs. As he kisses their hands, the Hierarchs kiss his forehead (and shoulders). When this action is completed, the priests return the Bishop-Elect back inside the Altar where he vests in full priestly vesture. The priests return to their position to commence the Divine Liturgy which continues as normal until after the “Holy God”.

At this point two priests take the Bishop-Elect out of the Holy Altar from the North Door and lead him to the Beautiful Gate facing the Archbishop, while the priests say:
1st Priest: Give the Command!
2nd Priest: Command!
1st Priest: Give the command, O Holy Master, for the one who is now presented before you!
Then the Bishop-Elect is taken into the Altar by the two most senior Bishops, and a Throne is placed in front of the Altar Table for the Archbishop. The 3 Ordination Troparia are chanted in the customary manner.


ORDINATION HYMNS
Grave Tone
O Holy Martyrs, whose example and whose deeds have won the crown of glory. Do intercede before our Lord, that he may have mercy on our souls evermore.

Grave Tone
Glory to you, O Christ our God, crown of all Apostles. The martyrs did with joy proclaim, that the Trinity was One in essence evermore.

Plagal of the Second Tone
Isaiah rejoice, for the Virgin did conceive. And bore the son whom thou called Emmanuel, who is both God and Man, and “Day-at-the-Dawn”(Oriental) is His name. Which is magnified with the Virgin hymned as blessed.

After circling the Holy Table three times, the Bishop-elect kneels on both knees before the Holy Altar, places his hands one on top of the other on the Holy Table, and rests his forehead on his hands. The
Archbishop covers the candidate’s head first with his omophorion and then with the Holy Gospel, opened and facing downwards.

All the ordaining Hierarchs place their right hands upon the Holy Gospel as the Archbishop exclaims:

Archbishop: With the permission and at the directive of His Beatitude pope and Patriarch (N) of Alexandria, and by the vote and approval of the Most Reverend Metropolitans of the Holy and Sacred Synod, the Divine Grace, which ever heals what is weak and completes what is lacking, ordains the most devout Presbyter (N), Bishop of the God-protected Diocese of (..), of the  Patriarchate of Alexandria & All Africa, Let us, therefore, pray for him, that the Grace of the All-Holy Spirit may come upon him.

PRAYER OF EPISCOPACY
Deacon: Let us attend.
As the clergy and the faithful kneel, the choir chants repeatedly,
Choir: Lord, have mercy.
The ordaining Archbishop completes the invocation of the Holy Spirit:
Archbishop: Master and Lord our God, who through Your all-praiseworthy Apostle Paul have established for us diverse orders and offices - first, Apostles, then Prophets, and thirdly, Teachers - to serve and officiate the divine celebration of Your pure and undefiled mysteries upon Your Holy Altar: grant, O Lord of all, that this man, who has been chosen and deemed worthy to be placed under the yoke of the Gospel and to enter the episcopal office by the laying on of hands by me, a sinner, and by my co-celebrant and fellow bishops here present, may be strengthened by the inspiration, power, and grace of Your Holy Spirit, as You did strengthen Your holy Apostles and Prophets, as You anointed Kings, as You consecrated Archpriests. Make his episcopacy to be blameless; adorn him with all dignity; make him holy that he may be worthy to ask for those things which are for the salvation of the people, and that You may hear his prayer. For holy is Your Name and glorious is Your Kingdom, of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever and to ages of ages. Amen.

THE PETITIONS
The second Bishop then offers the following litany in a low voice,
while the choir continues to chant, “Lord, have mercy”:
2nd Bishop: In peace let us pray to the Lord. 
For the peace from above and the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord. 
For the peace of the whole world, the stability of the Holy Churches of God, and the unity of all, let us pray to the Lord. 
For His All Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch (N), our Archbishop (N), for his Priesthood, for help, preservation, peace, health and salvation, and for the work of his hands, let us pray to the Lord. 
For the servant of God (N), who is now ordained Bishop, and for his salvation, let us pray to the Lord. 
That our good God who loves mankind may grant him to exercise his high priesthood blamelessly and without stain, let us pray to the Lord. For this city, for every city and country, and for the faithful who dwell therein, let us pray to the Lord. 
For all those in need of help and assistance from God, let us pray to the Lord. For our deliverance from all tribulation, wrath, danger, and need, let us pray to the Lord. 
Help us, save us, have mercy on us and protect us, O God, by Your grace. 
Remembering our most holy, pure, blessed and glorious Lady, the Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary with all the saints, let us commend ourselves and one another and our whole live to Christ our God.

When these petitions are completed, the Archbishop, with his hand
still on the newly ordained Bishop’s head, offers the following prayer:
Archbishop: O Lord, our God, in accordance with Your divine plan for us, You have appointed for our sake teachers of like nature with ourselves, because it is not possible for the nature of man to endure the Essence of
the Divinity, that they may stand by Your throne and offer to You sacrifices and oblations on behalf of all Your people. Do You, O Christ our Lord, make this man, who has been proclaimed a steward of the episcopal grace, an imitator of You, the true Shepherd, Who did lay down Your life for Your sheep; make him a guide for the blind, a light for those in darkness, an instructor of the unwise, a teacher of children, a lamp to the world, so that when he has accomplished the work of perfecting the souls of those entrusted to him in this present life, he may stand without reproach before Your throne and receive the great reward which You have prepared for those who have courageously contended for the preaching of Your Gospel.

For Yours it is to show mercy and to save us and to You do we ascribe glory, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever and to ages of ages. Amen.

The Holy Gospel is returned to its place on the Holy Table and the newly ordained Bishop rises from kneeling. The Archbishop presents him to the people and declares:
Archbishop: Axios!

THE VESTING
The newly ordained Bishop is vested by his fellow bishops, who add articles particular to his rank to the vestments that he shares with the priests and deacons. As he puts on each new item, a short prayer is said, generally taken from the Book of Psalms; the Archbishop exclaims, “Axios!” and the people chant the acclamation three times. When putting on the Sakkos:

May Your high priests, O Lord, be clothed in righteousness, and Your righteous ones shall rejoice with exultation, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

When putting on the Epigonation:
Gird Your sword upon Your thigh, O Mighty One, in Your splendor, and in Your beauty. Stretch out Your bowstrings, go forth and prevail in the cause of truth, gentleness and justice, and may Your right hand lead You to wondrous deeds; always, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

When putting on the omophorion:
When You took upon Your shoulders human nature which had gone astray, O Christ, You bore it to heaven, unto Your God and Father; always, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

When putting on the encolpion (using the same pectoral cross he has worn to this point)
Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me; always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

The Hierarchs welcome the newly ordained Bishop into their ranks with a brotherly kiss. The Divine Liturgy continues until the Enthronement.

ENTHRONEMENT AND CONCLUSION OF LITURGY.

After the chanting of the hymn “Blessed be the Name of the Lord,” the Archbishop once again presents the newly ordained Bishop from the Beautiful Gate to the congregation and now bestows upon him the final liturgical items associated with episcopacy. With the bestowal of each liturgical item he exclaims: Axios! (He is worthy!)
The congregation responds each time, as before, with the threefold chanting: “Axios! Axios! Axios!”
The Archbishop presents him with the Pastoral Staff, the emblem of Episcopal authority that the Church entrusts to him, saying:

Archbishop: Receive this Staff to shepherd the flock of Christ entrusted to you. To the obedient let it be a help and a support. With it, lead the disobedient and the wayward to admonishment and instruction.

As he sets the Mitre on the Bishop’s head, the Archbishop says:
Archbishop: The Lord has set upon your head a crown of precious stones. You asked life of Him, and He gave you length of days; always, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.

The newly ordained Bishop is led for the first time to the Episcopal Throne by two hierarchs who are preceded by the two deacons. The Archbishop addresses the new Bishop, and the Bishop in turn responds. After the remarks are concluded, the Archdeacon says, 
Archdeacon: Let us pray to the Lord
The newly ordained Bishop blesses the faithful with the cross while saying, 
Bishop-Elect: The blessing of the Lord be upon you...” 
The newly ordained Bishop offers the Dismissal Prayer. During the
Dismissal Prayer the choir chants, “Ton Despotin kai Archierea imon” as the newly enthroned Bishop blesses with a cross.
Choir: Ton Despotin kai Archierea imon, Kyrie phyllate, eis polla eti Despota, eis polla eti Despota, eis polla eti Despota! (Our Master and our High Priest - O Lord keep him safe! Many Years Master, Many Years Master, Many Years Master!)

Then the “Acclamations” are intoned by the deacons. After each invocation, the Choir answers: “Is polla eti despota!”
Deacon: To our Beatitude, Pope (N), Patriarch of Alexandria and all Africa, Is polla eti despota!
Choir: Is polla eti despota! 
The deacon then repeats the acclamation for all hierarchs present.. 
Deacon: To our newly consecrated Bishop (N) of (N), Is polla eti despota!
Choir: Is polla eti despota! 
Deacon: To all the priesthood, diaconate, monastic communities, and all Orthodox Christians, may the Lord give a quiet life, prosperity, manifold blessings and many years!

* It is customary for the newly ordained Bishop to bless the clergy from the Throne at the end of the Service. The people will receive the blessing of the newly-ordained Bishop at the conclusion of the
dinner festivities.

