PRAYERS FOR VARIOUS OCCAISIONS

BLESSING OF ANIMALS (ST. MODESTOS)

PRAYER FOR DROUGHT SEASON

BLESSING FOR A CAKE FOR ST. PHANOURIOS
Lord Jesus Christ our God, wonderful in your saints, who hear our intercessions and fulfil our requests that are for our good, bless this loaf which has been prepared by your servant N. (your servants N.N.) and is now offered in thanksgiving and glorification for what they have enjoyed from you through the intercession of the holy and glorious newly revealed Martyr and wonderworker Phanourios, and in memory of those who have died in the faith. Give them rest in your Kingdom and preserve us all in health as we do your will in peace and offer you thanks for all your gifts. Make our life peaceful, grant us those requests that are for our salvation, bestowing on us your earthly and heavenly blessings, at the intercessions of our most holy lady, the Mother of God, of the holy, glorious Martyr Phanourios and of all your saints.
For you are our God, and to you we give glory, together with your Father who has no beginning, and your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

PRAYER FOR FIRST OF THE YEAR

PRAYER OF FORGIVENESS
Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, Shepherd and Lamb, who takes away the sin of the world, you forgave the two debtors their loan and granted the sinful woman forgiveness of her sins. Remit, forgive, pardon, Master, the sins, iniquities, and offences, voluntary or involuntary, committed by these servants of yours, both knowingly and unwittingly, through transgression and disobedience. And if, as human beings clothed in flesh and living in the world, they have in any way been led astray by the Devil, whether in word or deed, knowingly or unwittingly; if they have trampled on the word of a priest, or come under the curse of a priest; if they have fallen under their own anathema, or been made subject to an oath, as you are good, Master, and do not remember evils, be well pleased for these servants of yours to be loosed by a word, in accordance with your great mercy granting them absolution from their own anathema and oath. Master and Lord who loves mankind, hear us therefore as we implore your goodness on behalf of these servants of yours, and, as you are full of mercy, overlook all their faults. Deliver them from eternal punishment. For you said, Master, ‘Whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven’. For you alone are without sin, and to you we give glory, together with your Father who is without beginning, and your all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.BLESSING EGGS

BLESSING OF PALMS
On Palm Sunday
Lord, our God, who are seated upon the Cherubim, you roused your power and sent your only-bego􏰑en Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, to save the world through his Cross, Burial and Resurrection. As he drew near to Jerusalem for his voluntary Passion, the people that sat in darkness and the shadow of death, taking the symbols of victory, boughs of trees and branches of palms, foreshadowed his Resurrection. Keep us yourself, Master, and preserve us, who, following their example, on this day before the Feast carry palms and branches in our hands and, like those crowds and those children, offer you our ‘Hosanna!’, so that with hymns and spiritual songs we may be counted worthy of the life-giving Resurrection on the third day; in Christ Jesus, our Lord, with whom you are blessed, together with your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
Amen.

BLESSING OF VEHICLE

FOR KOLLYVA
In Commemoration of a Saint
O Lord, all-loving King, who brought all things to completion by your word, and ordered the earth to produce fruits of every kind for our enjoyment and nourishment; who showed Daniel and the three Youths to be healthier through seeds and pulses than those who had fed sumptuously in Babylon, bless these seeds, mixed with different fruits, and make holy those who partake of them. For they have been offered by your servants for your glory, and in honour of Saint N., and in memory of those who have been made perfect in death in the Orthodox faith. Grant also, loving Lord, to those who have prepared these things and who celebrate this memorial, all their requests which are for their salvation and the enjoyment of your eternal blessings; at the prayers of our all-pure Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, of Saint N., whose memory we celebrate, and of all your Saints.
For it is you who bless and sanctify all things, Christ our God, and to you we give glory, together with your Father who is without beginning, and your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
Amen.