PRAYERS FOR VISITATION OF THE SICK

SERVICE FOR THE VISITATION OF THE SICK
Priest: Blessed is our God, always now and ever, and to the ages of ages.
Patient: Amen.
Priest: In peace let us pray to the Lord.
Patient: Lord, have mercy. (Repeated after each petition)
Priest: For the peace from above and for the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.
For the forgiveness of the sins and the restoration of the health of the servant of God (N) and for his (her) salvation, let us pray to the Lord.
For to you belong all glory, honor and worship, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages.
Patient: Amen.
Priest: Let us pray to the Lord.
Patient: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: Holy Father, physician of our souls and bodies, who sent your only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, to heal every illness and to save us from death, heal your servant (N) from his (her) spiritual and bodily sickness, through the grace of your Christ; restore him (her) to life, as it pleases you, so that through good works he (she) may render the thanksgiving and worship due to you. Through the intercessions of our most blessed and glorious Lady Theotokos and ever-Virgin Mary, and of all your saints.
For you are the fountain of healing, and to you we ascribe glory, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages.
Patient: Amen.



A PRAYER FOR THE SICK
Priest: Let us pray to the Lord.
Patient: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: Master and Lord of hosts, our God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is seated on the Cherubim, and praised in hymns by the Seraphim; who dwell on high and survey the lowly; who make the sun rise on the evil and the righteous, and make the rain fall on the just and the unjust; who with ineffable power and wisdom uphold and govern all creation and all that has breath; who chastise and then heal again: Accept me as I approach your goodness and do not despise me the sinner; but hear the voice of my petition, and send help from your holy dwelling place, showing compassion for the creation of your hands, you who listen to the prayers of all, and heal your servant (N) from the illness which afflicts him (her).
For yours it is, our God, to have mercy on us and to save us, and to you we ascribe glory, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages.
Patient: Amen.

A PRAYER FOR EVERY ILLNESS
Priest: Let us pray to the Lord.
Patient: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: O Lord our God, who cured the chronic and tormenting sufferings of mankind by your word alone, who healed the fever of Peter’s mother-in-law; do you, the same Lord, who chastise with compassion and heal with love, heal your servant (N) from the scourge which afflicts him (her); yes, Lord, you who are able to take away every illness and every malady, raise him (her) from his (her) bed of pain, pouring upon him (her) the remedy of your mercy, and grant him (her) perfect recovery and health. ’
For you are the healer of our bodies and souls, and to you we ascribe glory, together with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages.

Patient: Amen.

PRAYER BEFORE AN OPERATION
Holy Father who in your infinite love created man in your image and likeness; who formed his body out of the earth and breathed into it your divine and life-giving breath; who formed woman from his side and established them as stewards of all you created; who desired that they should live for ever both physically and spiritually by remaining obedient to your Majesty; do you yourself O Lord, look with mercy upon your fallen children and heal the spirit and body of your suffering servant (N); help him (her) endure the tribulations of his (her) flesh and keep his (her) soul safe through all his (her) trials. Bless and guide the hands of those to whom you have given the talent to effect the cure of the ailing. Grant that through the success of the forthcoming operation he (she) may regain his (her) physical and spiritual strength and, completely healed, may come in thanksgiving to give glory to you, Christ Jesus, the physician of our souls and bodies.
For yours it is to show mercy and to save us, and to you we ascribe glory, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.


PRAYER AFTER OPERATION
Holy Father, the only true physician of our souls and bodies, who cast down and lift up, accept me as I come in all humility to glorify you and thank you for preserving, by your grace, your servant (N) through his (her) recent operation. We thank you for blessing the attending physicians and the means employed for his (her) cure, and for restoring him (her) safe and sound to his (her) family and Church, having fended off every danger against his (her) body and soul. Raise him (her) speedily, we pray you, form the bed of illness on which he (she) lies and return him (her) to his (her) home and peaceful pursuits. Grant that the suffering of his (her) body may avail for the purifying of his (her) soul and may lead him (her) to return, in thanksgiving, to the works of his (her) hands and to Christ Jesus, the physician of soul and body. 
By the grace and compassion and love for man of your only-begotten Son, with whom you are blessed, together with your all-holy and good and life-giving Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages.
Amen.

PRAYER FOR THOSE WHO ARE SUFFERING FROM OLD AGE OR INCURABLE ILLNESS
Holy Father, physician of our souls and bodies, who know the strength of the spirit and the weakness of the body of each one of us, accept me as I draw near to your goodness and do not despise me, the sinner, but hear the voice of my petition, you who hear the prayers of all, and send help from your holy dwelling place and visit your servant (N) in your mercy.
Stand by him (her) in his (her) tribulation.
Stretch out your hand in the malady of his (her) body. Support him (her) in his (her) patience. Preserve him (her) by your grace and shelter.
Revive his (her) spirit and raise him (her) above every evil and suffering. Cast him (her) not away in time of old age or sickness, and forsake him (her) not when his (her) strength ebbs away.
Grant him (her) a Christian, painless, blameless and peaceful end in faith and endurance, and before you restore him (her) back to the earth count him (her) worthy to turn to you, and stand by him (her) with loving kindness and grace.
Grant to him (her) spiritual joy in the recollection of his (her) good works, and lead him (her) to repentance and confession of his (her) trespasses; so that he (she) may stand blameless before your Son and our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ on the day of his second coming. 
Through the intercessions of the glorious Lady Theotokos and ever-Virgin Mary and of all your Saints. Amen. 

The priest then invites the patient to make his (her) confession. If confession is made, at the conclusion the priest recites the prayer of absolution:

Priest: The grace of the Holy Spirit, through my insignificance, has you loosened and forgiven.
Then he recites with him (her) the prayers of Holy Communion.

I Believe, Lord, and I confess that you are truly the Christ, the Son of the living God, who came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the first. Also, I believe that this is your sacred Body and this your precious Blood. Therefore, I pray you: Have mercy on me and pardon my transgressions, voluntary and involuntary, in word and in deed, both known and unknown, and count me worthy to partake of your sacred Mysteries, for the remission of sins and everlasting life. Amen. Receive me today, O Son of God, as a partaker of your mystical supper. I will not reveal your mystery to your enemies, nor will I give you a kiss as did Judas, but as the Thief I confess to you: Lord, remember me when you come in your Kingdom.

And he gives him (her) Communion and prays as follows:
Priest: Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy, we pray to you, hear us and have mercy.
Patient: Lord, have mercy. (Repeated after each petition)
Priest: Again we pray for mercy, life, peace, salvation, visitation, forgiveness, remission of sins, restoration of the health of the servant of God (N), and for the pardon of all his (her) errors, both voluntary and involuntary.
For you are a merciful God, who love mankind, and to you we ascribe glory, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to the ages of ages.
Patient: Amen.

THE DISMISSAL
Priest: Glory to you, our God and our hope, glory to you. May Christ, our true God, through the intercessions of his most pure and holy Mother; by the power of the precious and life-giving Cross; through the protection of the venerable and glorious Prophet and Forerunner John the Baptist; of the holy, glorious and all—praised Apostles; of our Fathers among the saints Basil the Great and John Chrysostom; of the holy, glorious and victorious martyrs; of our holy and God-bearing Fathers; of the holy and righteous ancestors of our Lord God Joachim and Anna, (of the saint of the day), and of all the saints, have mercy on us and save us, for he is a good and merciful God who loves mankind.
Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us and save us.
Patient: Amen.
