SERVICE OF THE TRISAGION FOR THE DEPARTED
Priest: Blessed is our God, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
Reader: Amen. Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (x3).
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins. Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities for your name’s sake.
Lord, have mercy (three times).
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.
Our Father, in heaven, may your name be sanctified, your kingdom come, your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread, and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.
Priest: For yours is the Kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
Reader: Amen.
The Evlogitaria for the Departed
Mode 1, Plagal.
Blessed are you, O Lord, teach me your statutes.
The choir of Saints has found the source of life and the door of Paradise; may I too find the way through repentance; I am the lost sheep, call me back, O Saviour, and save me.
Blessed are you, O Lord, teach me your statutes.
I am an image of your ineffable glory, though I bear the marks of offences; take pity on your creature, Master, and with compassion cleanse me; and give me the longed-for fatherland, making me once again a citizen of Paradise.
Blessed are you, Lord, teach me your statutes.
Of old you formed me from nothing and honoured me with your divine image, but because I transgressed your commandment, you returned me to the earth from which I was taken; bring me back to your likeness, my ancient beauty.
Blessed are you, Lord, teach me your statutes.
Give rest, O God, to your servant(s), and se􏰑le him (her/them) in Paradise, where the choirs of the Saints and all the Just shine out like beacons; give rest to your servant(s) who has (have) fallen asleep, overlooking all his (her/their) offences.
Glory. Triadikon.
Let us devoutly hymn the threefold light of the one Godhead as we cry: Holy are you, the Father without beginning, the Son likewise without beginning and the divine Spirit; enlighten us who worship you in faith, and snatch us from the everlasting fire.
Both now. Theotokion.
Hail, honoured one, who bore God in the flesh for the salvation of all; through you the human race has found salvation; through you may we find Paradise, O pure and blessed Mother of God.
Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia. Glory to you, O God (three times). Kontakion. Mode 4 Plagal.
With the Saints give rest, O Christ, to the soul(s) of your servant(s), where there is no toil, nor grief, nor sighing, but everlasting life.
Then the following troparia are sung in the 4th Mode:
With the spirits of the righteous made perfect in death give rest, O Saviour, to the soul(s) of your servant(s); keeping it (them) for the life of blessedness with you, O Lover of mankind.
In your repose where all your saints find rest, give rest, O Lord, to the soul(s) of your servant(s), for you alone are immortal.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
You are our God who descended into Hades and did away with the pains of those who had been bound; give rest, O Saviour, also to the soul(s) of your servant(s).
Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen. .
O only pure and spotless Virgin, who bore God without seed,
intercede for the salvation of the soul(s) of your servant(s). 
Deacon: Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy, we pray you, hear and have mercy.
People: Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.
Deacon: Also we pray for the repose of the soul of the servant of God, N., who has fallen asleep, and that he/she may be pardoned every offence, both voluntary and involuntary.
People: Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. 
Deacon: That the Lord our God may establish his/her soul where the righteous rest. The mercies of God, the kingdom of heaven and the forgiveness of his/her sins, let us ask of Christ, our immortal King and God.
People: Grant this, O Lord.
Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy.
Priest: O God of spirits and all flesh, who trampled down death and crushed the devil, giving life to your world; do you, Lord, give rest to the soul(s) of your servant(s) N. (and N.), who has (have) fallen asleep, in a place of light, a place of green pasture, a place of refreshment, whence pain, grief and sighing have fled away. Pardon, O God, as you are good and love mankind, every sin committed by him/her (them) in word or deed or thought, because there is none who will live and not sin, for you alone are without sin; your righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and your word is truth.
For you are the resurrection, the life and the repose of your servant(s) N. (and N.), who has (have) fallen asleep, Christ our God, and to you we give glory, together with your Father who is without beginning, and your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
People: Amen.
Priest: Glory to you, Christ God, our hope, glory to you.
People: Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, both now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen. 
Lord, have mercy (x3) 
Holy father, give the blessing.
The Priest gives the Dismissal as follows:
Priest: May he who has authority over the living and the dead, as immortal King, and who rose from the dead, Christ, our true God, through the intercessions of his most pure and blameless Mother, of the holy, glorious and all-praised Apostles, of our venerable and God-bearing fathers, of the holy and glorious forefathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, of the holy and righteous Lazarus, for four days dead, the friend of Christ, and of all the Saints, establish in the tents of the righteous the soul(s) of his servant(s) who has (have) gone from us, give him/her (them) rest in the bosom of Abraham, and number him/her (them) with the righteous; and have mercy on us and save us, for he is good and loves mankind.)
Everlasting your memory, our brother/sister (brothers and sisters), worthy of blessedness and ever-remembered.
Choir: Everlasting Memory (x3).
Priest: Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ, our God, have mercy on us. People: 
Choir: Amen.

On the Saturdays for the Departed the petitions in the Litany are as follows:
Deacon: Have mercy on us, O God according to your great mercy, we pray you, hear and have mercy.
People: Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.
Deacon: Also we pray for the repose of all devout and Orthodox Christians who have fallen asleep before us in hope of resurrection, Rulers, Patriarchs, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Monks, Nuns, Parents, Grandparents, Great Grandparents and Ancestors, those from the beginning until the last, and that they may be pardoned every offence, both voluntary and involuntary.
People: Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. *Deacon: That the Lord our God may establish their souls where the righteous rest.
People: Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.
Deacon: The mercies of God, the kingdom of heaven and the forgiveness of their sins, let us ask of Christ, our immortal King and God.
People: Grant this, O Lord.
Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.
People: Lord, have mercy.
And the prayer O God of spirits ..., and the rest as above.

